@@51&52

Perhaps by François LADATTE (Francesco Ladetti or Ladetto) (1706-87) 

51 and 52. Pair of sphinxes 

26.5 cms. (height of 'Summer', 51); 25.5 cms. (height of 'Winter', 52) 

Bronze with a blackened ruddy varnish worn in a few parts to expose the yellow metal. Heavy, lost-wax, casts. There are holes drilled through the back left leg and the front left leg. There are firing cracks on the rump under the tail of the sphinx with its left fore paw raised (51) and in the tail of the other. Mounted, before late 1987, with modern bolts on discoloured white marble bases, cut from a single piece of marble, obviously not original. This was replaced by dark mahogany moulded plinths made by Ray Ansty of the Museum workshop. Placed on display in the Chambers Hall Room in 1987, previously in reserve. 

Given by G. Reitlinger, 1972, but only received by the Museum after the fire in his home in 1978 (see No. 13). 

According to the donor, these were originally fire-dogs (which may well be correct) and solid (which is incorrect) and the heads are portraits 'representing, according to Sir Francis Watson, Madame Parabère, Mistress of the Regent Philippe Duke of Orleans, after the models made by Jacques Caffieri c.1715-20 for Chateau de Champs'. The idea that the royal French mistresses-or English actresses-of the eighteenth century were depicted in sphinxes in bronze, and porcelain was a very popular one in the early part of this century, probably strengthened by the pastiche sphinxes made in the late nineteenth century in terracotta and plaster incorporating heads of Madame du Barry and so on (striking examples were sold Christie's, London, 3 April 1985, lot 79). There seems no good reason at all to believe that there was any portrait element in these bronzes. On the other hand, the idea (also credited to Sir Francis Watson) that the two sphinxes may be connected with two of the Seasons, and may possibly belong to a series of four, is surely correct: in any case one sphinx (51) wears a rose-trimmed dress (for Summer) and the other (52) a fur-edged pelisse (for Winter). 

Although there is something French about the ornamental character of these sphinxes neither the type of heavy cast nor the colour has convinced experts that they are French. They are reminiscent of the ornamental work of Francesco Ladatte at the court of Turin. In the gilt bronze harpies which he supplied for the furniture made by Pifetti for the queen's Gabinetto di Toletta in the Palazzo Reale soon before his second stay in Paris which lasted from 1734 until 1744 (see M. Bernardi, Barocco piemontese (Turin, 1964), 130) and in the allegories surrounding the great clock in the Palazzo Reale signed in 1775 (ibid. 49) we find the same taste for elegant female heads, fringed draperies, strung pearls, brocade with relief patterns and a textured ground, and the same sinuous outline broken by the projection of floral crowns and ribbons. 

Jennifer Montagu, to whom I owe the suggestion that the sphinxes might be from Turin, pointed out that they probably supported shields with their raised paws. For other sphinx fire-dogs with shields see the pair in the Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, Munich (24-106; H. Ottomeyer and P. Pröschel, Vergoldete Bronzen (Munich, 1986), i. 71, 

no. 1.10.10) and the pair signed by Eugène Piat sold 11 June 1989 at the Hôtel des Ventes, Troyes (Gazette de l'Hôtel Drouot, 2 June 1989). 





@@53



Perhaps by Pierre LEGROS II (1666-1719) 

53. Bust portrait of a cardinal 

43.5 cms. (height, excluding socle); 17.4 cms. (length of base of socle); 15.8 cms. (width of base of socle); 11.5 cms. (height of socle) 

Carrara marble. The foremost curl on the proper right-hand side has been broken off (the point where it touches the collar remains). There are some rusty stains natural to the marble (most obvious in the cap), also some grey stains. 

Purchased for £550 by the National Art-Collections Fund, 1959, and presented to the Ashmolean Museum. Said to come from the Lazzaroni Collection, Nice. Sir Karl Parker first appealed to the Fund on 30 June 1959 when the sculpture was on offer from Hans Calmann for £800. Lord Crawford, the Chairman of the Fund, replied from his castle in Fife on 22 July that the Committee had 'felt a little uncertain about the Bust-or, rather, I should say whether we should pay up' because a bust of the same period 'more certainly by Foggini' had been purchased by the Victoria and Albert Museum for a mere £80, not many years before. In view of this Ian Robertson, writing on behalf of the Keeper, reported on 1 August that Mr Calmann had lowered his price to £550. The grant for this amount had been made by October. 

On acquisition this bust was attributed to Giovanni-Battista Foggini (1652-1725), but Parker wrote in the Museum's Annual Report (pp. 45–6) that ‘an alternative and perhaps in some ways more probable' attribution to Giuseppe Mazzuoli (1644-1725) 'is worth considering in conjunction with the problem of the sitter's identity'. He added that 

"No traditional or otherwise proven identification has been recorded; and though it is safe to reject the recent suggestion that the bust is of Leopoldo de' Medici, a glance at the series of engraved portraits of cardinals of the period in question, published by Giovanni Giacomo dei Rossi, is enough to show the almost baffling difficulty of recognizing a subject with certainty when conventional standards of expression, attire, hair-style, &c. were so universally adopted."

With this it is impossible to disagree; but Parker continued to claim that 

"Such features, however, as the unusually prominent nose, the wide- set eyes, the projecting lower lip, and the reflective, as it were withdrawn, expression of the face, point to Paluzzo Paluzzi degli Albertoni (1623-1698), who was raised to the purple in 1664 by Alexander VII, but came into power chiefly after the election to the Papacy of the octogenarian Clement X in 1670, and was by him permitted to adopt the name of the Altieri, a family long associated with the sculptor Mazzuoli."

The comparisons upon which this identification depend are not strong and the idea began, one must suspect, with a desire to clinch the attribution to Mazzuoli. Oddly the identification was accepted and because of it Klaus Lankheit proposed an attribution (made also by Hugh Honour) to Lorenzo Merlini (in a letter of 28 March 1960 to Mr Taylor and then in his Florentinische Barockplastik (Munich, 1962), 185), noting that, according to an anonymous memoir and autobiography, Merlini made a 'statua al naturale of Cardinal Paluzzo Paluzzi degli Albertoni' for Cardinal Lorenzo Altieri 

for the anticamera of his palace (Palazzo Altieri al Gesù) in Rome. Unfortunately for this argument Merlini's portrait- almost a half-figure rather than a bust (hence perhaps the term 'statua')-survives in Palazzo Altieri, and a terracotta for it (labelled as by Lorenzo Ottoni) is in Palazzo Braschi (see A. N. Cellini, La scultura del seicento (Turin, 1982), 106-7, pl. 4) and it does not resemble the bust in the Ashmolean. Moreover, even Merlini's best work (such as the effigy in the monument in S. Giovanni dei Fiorentini, Rome, illustrated in R. Enggass, Early Eighteenth-Century Sculpture in Rome (Pennsylvania, 1976), figs. 90-2) does not approach the Ashmolean portrait in vitality and his modelling was always superior to his carving. It must be said also that none of the portraiture by Foggini or Mazzuoli has quite this sharpness of carving or mobility of features or is so utterly lacking in dull surfaces or gross handling. Lorenzo Ottoni's comparable portraiture in marble (for example, his bust of Pope Alexander VIII in the Städtische Galerie Liebieghaus, Frankfurt on Main) is not dissimilar but is cruder in its pursuit of effect, especially in the use made of the drill. 

The sculptor working in the last decade of the seventeenth century, and the first of the eighteenth, who was most capable of work of this quality and character was Pierre Legros II. There are no comparable bust portraits by him but his recumbent effigy of Cardinal Girolamo Casanata, now partially concealed by the German-language confessional in S. Giovanni in Laterano (1701-3), and his statue of the same man in the Biblioteca Casanatense (1706-8), also in Rome, exhibit the same exaggerated features, grotesque in any other artist's work, combined with great vitality of expression, variety of profile, and exquisite treatment of detail. (The carving of the aged flesh of the neck at contact with the collar is remarkably close in the statue and the Ashmolean's bust.) 

As was pointed out in the Annual Report of the National Art-Collections Fund, 56 (1959), 30, the shape of the bust strongly suggests that it was designed to be set in a circular frame. The socle upon which it is now mounted cannot be original. 



@@54



After Antonio LOMBARDO (b. c.1458; d. 1516) 

54. Portion of a frieze involving vine tendrils and a cherub 

33.5 cms. (height); 89 cms. (length) 

Plaster of Paris, somewhat grey and abraded (perhaps from damp), with some minor cracks and very irregular edges. Solid cast with no apparent seams. Set in a thick pine frame, serving also as a tray. 

Provenance unknown. Possibly a residue of the Ruskin School's teaching aids. 

The plaster cast is made from moulds taken of the frieze on the base of the north face of the pedestals of the two pilasters which form a triumphal arch distinguishing sanctuary from choir within the raised Capella Maggiore of S. Maria dei Miracoli in Venice. This church was erected between 1481 and 1489 under the direction of Pietro Lombardo and his sons Tullio and Antonio, the latter being credited with this particular frieze, which develops, to either side of the portion represented here, into female sea monsters upon whose tails the putti are riding. The carving, which is among the most skilled and charming of its period in northern Italy, was much admired by the close of the nineteenth century. Comparison with the original reveals that the cherub's nose has been damaged since this cast was made. The cast might have been supplied by a firm such a Brucciani (see Nos. 450, 580, 581), in whose list, published before 1906, one finds a pilaster from this church, but it is unlike their work in its solidity and absence of seams and is no less likely to have been acquired in Italy. 

Ruskin, in the Venetian Index appended to the third volume of The Stones of Venice, considered the church of the Miracoli to be the 'most interesting and finished example in Venice of the Byzantine Renaissance, and one of the most important in Italy of the cinquecento style. All its sculptures should be examined with great care, as the best possible examples of a bad style.... Its grotesques are admirable examples of the base Raphaelesque design', he continued, and urged his readers to 

"Note especially the children's heads tied up by the hair, in the lateral sculptures at the top of the altar steps. A rude workman, who could hardly have carved the head at all, might have been allowed this or any other mode of expressing discontent with his own doings; but the man who could carve a child's head so perfectly must have been wanting in all human feeling, to cut if off, and tie it by the hair to a vine leaf. Observe, in the Ducal Palace, though far ruder in skill, the heads always emerge from the leaves, they are never tied to them." (E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, The Works of John Ruskin, xi (London, 1904), 393.) 

Given the specificity of this reference, and the fact that one of his finest drawings given to the Ruskin School Collection (Educational Series 94) is of a portion of the same frieze, one must wonder whether this cast was not made at his instigation. As with his architectural daguerrotypes, the commissioning of casts is a relatively little-documented aspect of his work as a historian and critic, but he presented casts to the Architectural Museum as early as 1854 (ibid. xii, p. lxxi) and also gave some, later in life, to the St George's Museum in Sheffield (ibid. xxx (1910), 189). We know that he obtained casts in Venice through his friend the Commendatore Giacomo Boni: those Boni made of the Colleone monument apparently disintegrated (ibid.). The church was extensively restored by the Besarel brothers for Count Roberto Boldù in 1887 and that is a likely date for the making of casts on a commercial basis. However, an identical plastercast, in store in the Victoria and Albert Museum (1851-432), was acquired in 1851. 





@@55



By or after Girolamo, Aurelio, or Lodovico LOMBARDO (active 1550-80) 

55. Triumph of Ariadne 

28.1 cms. (height); 38 cms. (length) 

Bronze with a chocolate brown patina. Lost-wax cast. A firing crack at upper right-hand side with two plugs inserted in the bronze, of which one is now missing. The surface much scratched, especially at top left, perhaps in cleaning. 'B./687/F' painted in white in the lower right-hand corner. 

Lent in October 1874 by C. D. E. Fortnum and bequeathed by him in 1899. B. 687 in his catalogues. 'Found in London among refuse old metal, rescued by the older Hatfield, the bronzist, who cleaned it and yielded it to me about 1856' (large catalogue). 'I found this fine bronze in London. It had been rescued from the melting pot by Hatfield the bronzist, by whom it was cleaned from the accumulation of filth with which it was covered, and purchased by me' (notebook catalogue). It was not included in the preliminary catalogue compiled by Fortnum in 1857 and so was probably not acquired before 1858. It is likely to be the 'Ariadne' in an MS 'Memorandum of Prices Paid' which cost him £4 in 1858. It was exhibited at the Archaeological Institute in February 1861. In Fortnum's photograph it is displayed on a plain flat wooden moulding with a gold fillet at the sight edge. The present heavy walnut frame with gilt egg and dart and waterleaf mouldings was probably made by the Museum workshop in the 1950s to match the old Renaissance moulding found for the panel painted by Filippo Lippi. 

Fortnum esteemed this relief very highly and expanded unusually upon its merits: a 'work of great beauty and interest; the admirable treatment of the Satyrs, the calm grace of pose and expression in Ariadne; the spirit of the antique well sustained, but the best manner of the Renaissance equally apparent'. He recognized that it was a version of one of the two reliefs that adorn the Renaissance base made for the antique bronze statue of a nude boy known as the Idolino which was in his day in the Uffizi but is today in the Museo Archeologico in Florence, but he did not appreciate that this statue, believed originally to be a Bacchus, had been discovered in 1530 at Pesaro (for its history and reputation see F. Haskell and N. Penny, Taste and the Antique (London and New Haven, Conn., 1981), 240-1). The Idolino's base had been attributed, as Fortnum noted, to Vittorio, son of Lorenzo Ghiberti, by J. W. Gaye, (Carteggio inedito d'artisti, i (Florence, 1839), 108 n.), but Fortnum seems to have preferred the attribution to Desiderio da Settignano, being much struck by the exquisite low relief. Neither sculptor could, however, have been responsible for the base since this cannot have been made before the statue was discovered. Furthermore, it was not likely to have been made in Florence. The base is in fact known to have been made for Duke Giudobaldo II of Urbino, that is after 1538, and probably several decades later, but before 1574 (when he died). Ulrich Middeldorf ('Notes on Italian Bronzes', Burlington Magazine (Dec. 1938), 251-7) convincingly attributed it to the three sons of Antonio Lombardo (see No. 54). These Lombardi established a foundry at Recanati. The bronze tabernacles in the Cathedral of Milan of 1559-60 and at Fermo of 1570 and the bronze doors and font for the basilica at Loreto which are documented as by them are very close in style to the base of the Idolino both in the naturalistic ornament and in the unmannered classicism of the narratives. It has not been possible to place the Ashmolean's relief next to the bronze in Florence but in both reliefs most of the detail (which appears in both to be reproduced from the wax model) is the same-for example, the pattern of fur at the top of the second satyr's leg as it meets the edge of the vine leaf, the rippling neckline of Ariadne's dress, the faintly indicated lion head on the hub of the chariot wheel. The relief in Florence appears to be more varied in depth and more vigorous in facial character; it also curves forward below feet and wheel; but, when parts of the two reliefs are measured, they correspond exactly: in both cases the chariot wheel is 6.7 cms. in diameter, the wand 9 cms. in length (from top of Ariadne's thumb to tip), and the second satyr measures 4.85 cms. in a straight line from under his right armpit to his left shoulder. This exactness would be remarkable if achieved by a copyist who would have to calculate the degree to which the bronze shrinks when cooling. 

One must therefore respect Fortnum's idea that his relief was made in the same period and from the same model as the base (the reliefs, that is, were cast in bronze from two wax models which were cast from the same mould and tooled with reference to a common master version). What would seem unlikely is that it was a 'rejected first casting' as Fortnum proposed, because, although there is a firing crack in Fortnum's relief, there are more serious flaws in the relief on the base-in particular a crack across the right arm and shoulder of the first satyr and a damaged area between the second satyr and Ariadne-as Fortnum himself observed in separate notes interleaved in his notebook catalogue. 

It is, of course, just possible that the Lombardi's moulds and master version survived and were employed in a later period. That there would have been an interest in doing so in the second half of the eighteenth century seems probable since the Lombardi's style of relief uncannily anticipates the imitation of the antique which then became fashionable. A wax mould and a wax cast after the relief are recorded in an eighteenth-century catalogue of models at the Doccia porcelain factory and orders were placed with Vincenzo Foggini for versions of the two reliefs on the Idolino's base on 12 June 1748-a wax cast survives in the Museum's collection (K. Lankheit, Die Modellsammlung der Porzellanmanufaktur Doccia (Munich, 1982), 136, and pl. 202). The Adam brothers had a plaster cast of the base in their collection and Robert Adam employed one in the furnishings supplied to Audley End in Essex where he worked from 1763 onwards. A study of the base is to be found in a sketchbook by Joseph Nollekens in the Ashmolean Museum (fo. 81). Terracotta casts of the relief, identified merely as 'Bassorilievo greco', were illustrated as available for sale in the catalogue of the 'Manifattura di Signa. Terre Cotte artistiche e decorative' which had sale-rooms in Florence, Rome, Turin, and Paris in the early years of the century (no. 381, pl. xxxviii in the copy belonging to the Sculpture Department, Sotheby's). 

Stefano MADERNO (1576–1636) 





@@56



56. Farnese Hercules 

50.7 cms. (height including integral plinth); 22.3 cms. (length of plinth); 17.9 cms. (width of plinth); 4 cms. (height of plinth at back); 2 cms. (height of plinth at front) 

Terracotta of pale pinky grey colour, fired, or perhaps refired, at a very high temperature, the body as hard as stoneware. There are slight vertical firing cracks, e.g. down front of the chest. The proper right corner of the back of the base has been broken off and refixed. Proper left corner also, including a portion of the hillock support, has been broken and refixed. There are also large cracks in this latter area. The figure is hollow and the interiors of hillock, club, and drapery are visible from below. A large plug of clay in the centre of the underside of the plinth (not beneath the feet). Incised on the front face of the rock below the club: 

"FAYKON/AOHNAICO / EÏOIEI”—with a line below, and beneath this 'St. M. Ex/1617'. 

Given by Edmund Oldfield FSA, July 1899. 

The colossal antique statue of which this is one of the earliest known reproductions seems to have been discovered in 1546. It had been placed by 1556 in Palazzo Farnese in Rome (see F. Haskell and N. Penny, Taste and the Antique (London and New Haven, Conn., 1981), 229–32, no. 46). For later copies of it in terracotta and bronze see Nos. 152, 414 and 416. There are a series of four terracotta figures and groups of similar size signed by Maderno in the Ca d'Oro, Venice (D. sc. 79, 80, 81, 82). They represent Hercules and the Lion, Hercules and Cacus (both dated 1621), Hercules and Antaeus (dated 1622), and the group of a bearded hero holding a youth over his shoulder now thought to represent Neoptolemus with Astyanax (undated). The last mentioned is signed 'St. M. ex' like the Ashmolean's terracotta, whereas the others are signed 'St. M. f', the 'f' for fecit perhaps being reserved for works which he had invented. It it tempting to speculate that Maderno devised the three groups of Hercules in action as companions for his copy of Hercules resting after his labours, although he is unbearded when struggling with the lion which is surprising if a series is intended. The Neoptolemus group has been interpreted in numerous ways. In Perrier's prints of antique sculpture published in 1638 it is identified as Commodus. Maderno may well have thought that it too represented Hercules. It is likely, in any case, to have been thought of as a companion for the terracotta Farnese Hercules since the marble originals were displayed together in Palazzo Farnese (the group is now in the Naples Museum (no. 150, inv. 5999)). 

Maderno may have made more than one version of these peices: another Hercules and Antaeus, dated 1620, is in the Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh (1981.1, from the Clerk of Penicuik Collection, said to have been bought in Italy in the 1720s), and this group was also reproduced in bronze (Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore, 54.665), as was the Hercules with the Nemean Lion (L. Camins, Renaissance and Baroque Bronzes from the Abbott Guggenheim Collection (Fine Art Museums of San Francisco, 1988), 84-5, no. 28). Some of the Ca d'Oro terracottas have clean lines across the upper limbs of the figures. These cannot be caused by separate firing since that could not result in such neat joins. The terracottas must have been cut carefully into pieces, presumably to facilitate the taking of moulds, and then reassembled. 

Maderno's Farnese Hercules is not a meticulously exact copy. The curls of hair and beard are, relatively, smaller in the marble. Here they are treated more like the lion's mane and with the same crisp tooling that is found in the groups in the Ca d'Oro, and the face has the same mean or pained grimace that seems to have been Maderno's only idea of expression. This is less true of a terracotta copy of the Farnese Hercules, unsigned and larger (82.08 cms. high), also in the Ca d'Oro which as been attributed to Maderno (B. Candida, Bronzetti, terrecotte, placchette rinascimentali di ispirazione classica alla Ca d'Oro e al Museo Correr di Venezia (Rome, 1981), 57-9, no. 14). 

Edmund Oldfield, former librarian and fellow of Worcester College, Oxford, presented the Ashmolean Museum with a choice collection of small classical antiquities-gold ear pendants, iridescent glass perfume flasks, mortuary diadems, Greek vases on the occasion of moving house from Thurloe Square in London to Torquay (see his letter to Arthur Evans of 27 May 1899 in the Archives of the Department of Antiquities); he died at Torquay in 1902 and bequeathed some few additional items. The Hercules is identified in the manuscript list of objects presented in July 1899, section IV 'objects separate from cabinet', p. 7. There seems to have been no other 'modern' work, or at least no other avowedly 'modern' work, in his collection (see, however, No. 165). Most of his collection is likely to have been assembled when he was travelling in Italy and the Mediterranean. 

A sample was taken from the base of the figure by Mrs Doreen Stoneham of the Oxford Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art in 1973 and again in Mach 1987 and thermo-luminescence tests suggested a date between 1573 and 1743 or 1537 and 1697 (refs. 81-m-61 and 381-z-93). 

Whilst this catalogue was in proof Sergey O. Androssov's important article 'Works by Stefano Maderno, Bernini and Rusconi from the Farsetti Collection in the Ca d'Oro and the Hermitage' appeared in the Burlington Magaine (May 1991, pp. 292-7). Androssov shows that the terracotta Farnese Hercules in the Ca d'Oro is likely to be by Camillo Rusconi to whom he also attributes a terracotta Apollo Belvedere in the same collection. To the Maderno terracotta groups in Venice he adds four others Nicodemus with the body of Christ, dated 1605, now in the Hermitage, a Herculese and Telephus, dated 1620, a Herculese and the Centaur, dated 1626 (surviving only as a plaster cast) and a Laocoon, dated 1630. He demonstrates that it is likely that the works by both Maderno, Rusconi and Bernini in the Hermitage and the Ca d'Oro all came from the collection of the Abate Filippo Farsetti (1703– 1774). 





@@57



Giuseppe MAZZUOLI (1644–1725) 

57. St Matthew 

35.7 cms. (height); 11 cms. (length of base); 10 cms. (width of base, excluding the projecting cloud under the saint's right foot) 

Terracotta of a pale pinky orange. Many breaks, mostly repaired with skill: the head of the saint, the child angel's right foot and both wings; part of the cloud base and both feet of the saint were once detached. There are a few minor chips in the drapery. A little filling is evident around breaks (e.g. the child angel's right foot). Purchased together with No. 58 from Messrs. P. & D. Colnaghi, Bond Street, where exhibited February and March 1964 (Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Italian Sculpture, no. 20), with a grant of £1,000 made by the National Art-Collections Fund on 19 April 1965. 

See No. 58. A sample was taken from this figure by Mrs Doreen Stoneham of the Oxford Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art in March 1987 and thermo-luminescence tests suggested that it was fired between 1657 and 1777 (ref. 381-z-86). 





@@58



Giuseppe MAZZUOLI (1644-1725) 

58. St Philip 

38.5 cms. (height); 14 cms. (length of base); 10 cms. (width of base) 

Terracotta of a pale pinky orange with traces of red paint. Minor chips to edges of drapery (e.g. on saint's left arm). A slight firing crack behind the figure. 

Purchased together with No. 57 from Messrs. P. & D. Colnaghi, Bond Street, where exhibited February and March 1964 (Seventeenth and Eighteenth Century Italian Sculpture, no. 19), with a grant of £1,000 made by the National Art-Collections Fund on 19 April 1965. 

This terracotta bozzetto and its companion (No. 57) are related to two of the statues of the Apostles commissioned by 1679 for Siena Cathedral, executed in marble, apparently during the summer months of the years 1680 and 1695, and set up against the pillars of the nave in the latter year, replacing the trecento set which were placed in the skyline of the façade. The St Philip was being executed in marble in 1687 and the St Matthew in 1689. This was the most important commission given to Giuseppe Mazzuoli who was born in Volterra, brought up in Siena, and a protégé of Cardinal Flavio Chigi, 'Cardinale-nipote'-the Chigi being a Sienese family. Mazzuoli had studied in Rome under Ercole Ferrata and Melchiorre Cafà and had executed the figure of Charity on Bernini's tomb of the Chigi pope, Alexander VII (see L. Pascoli, Vite de' pittori, scultori ed architetti moderni (Rome, 1736), ii. 479-82; V. Suboff, 'Giuseppe Mazzuoli', Jahrbuch der preußischen kunstsammlungen (1928), 37; F. Pansecchi, 'Contribuiti a Giuseppe Mazzuoli', Commentari, 10 (1959), 35; E. Carli, ‘Le statue degli Apostoli per il Duomo di Siena', Antichità viva, 7 (1968), 3–20). The Apostles were removed from the Cathedral in 1890 after almost forty years of fierce debate (D. I. Romano, 'Le statue degli Apostoli del Duomo di Siena ovvero una brutta pagina di storia senese', Paragone, 26 (Nov. 1975), 85-100). They were purchased for the London Oratory in the Brompton Road in June 1895 on the strength of photographs of them in a warehouse in Genoa (A. Laing, 'Baroque Sculpture in a Neo-Baroque Setting', in M. Napier and A. Laing (eds.), The London Oratory: Centenary 1884-1984 (London, n.d. [1984]), 65–74). Other bozzetti connected with this commission survive. That for St Simeon Zelotes is in the City Art Gallery, Birmingham (see Heim Gallery, London, Faces and Figures of the Baroque (autumn 1971), no. 64); that for St Paul is in the Museo dell'opera del Duomo, Orvieto; that for St John the Evangelist was in 1965 in the possession of an American professor (purchased in Florence, coloured, somewhat larger-48 cms. in height and with a square base); and gilded bozzetti for Christ holding the Cross and the Virgin Mary, two statues added to the series in Siena Cathedral but not purchased for the Oratory and now untraced, are in the Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh (also larger-46 cms. in height-see Heim Gallery, London, Seven Centuries of European Sculpture (summer 1982), nos. 21-2). Versions of several of these bozzetti (Paul, Philip, and Matthew) are also to be found in the Fondazione Accademia Musicale Chigiana in Siena, as is the only recorded version of the St Bartholomew. The bozzetti for Philip and Matthew in Siena are larger (42.4 and 42.2 cms.) than those in Oxford, and more scratchily modelled in the head. That of St Philip is initialled 'D.B.' (M. Butzek, 'Die Modellsammlung der Mazzuoli in Siena', Pantheon, 46 (1988), 75-102, pls. 33-6). The inventory of the vast collection of models and casts belonging to the Mazzuoli family which was compiled in 1767 specifically mentions two St Matthews as original clay models by Giuseppe (ibid. 88, no. 102, and 91, no. 107) and there are other duplications of this sort. The attributions in the inventory are unlikely to be entirely reliable, and it certainly seems as odd that Mazzuoli should have repeated himself as it seems natural for one of his pupils or family to have copied him. Laing (op. cit.) notes the significance in this connection of the fact that a nephew of Mazzuoli made full-scale replicas of the statues for the Collegiata of Sinalunga. Hugh Macandrew (notes in the Department's files) points out that there is a relationship between the Ashmolean's bozzetto (probably representing St Philip) and a St James the Less, one of a series of wooden sculptures, about 22 feet high, in the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo in Siena-another statue in the series, the St Jude, is also related to one of Mazzuoli's Apostles, but there is no reason to attribute these figures to Mazzuoli nor to call them bozzetti (as Enzo Carli does in Il Museo dell'Opera e la Libreria Piccolomini di Siena (Siena, 1946), 27). 

The relationship between the Ashmolean's two bozzetti and the marble statues now in the Oratory has been admirably defined by Macandrew. 

"The St. Matthew is close to the full scale figure, except that in the latter the head is inclined more to the right and the Apostle looks directly at his gospel. In the larger format there is greater emphasis on the front plane. The putto is turned more to the spectator while the Apostle's left foot and drapery are brought more to the front.... The other statuette is obviously connected with the Oratory's St. Philip, the essential differences being that in the latter the Saint is shown with his usual attribute, a Cross, which he supports under his left arm. Apart from this however and also the fact that in the larger format the head is turned up to the left, correspondence is very close indeed. Facial features are exactly similar as indeed are his stance, the folds of the drapery and the position of the right arm holding the book... it is possible that the modification was the result of the instability which is plainly evident in the bozzetto." 

Documents do in fact reveal that Mazzuoli modified his St Philip when he was carving it (Butzek, op. cit. 89 and n. 104). 





@@59



After MICHELANGELO Buonarroti (1475-1564)

59. Aurora 

10.8 cms. (height from support below figure's right elbow to top of head); 18.7 cms. (length); 23.5 cms. (length of figure from top of head to broken end of figure's right leg); 22 cms. (length of base); 9 cms. (height of base); 8.9 cms. (width of base) 

Red wax. The figure's left arm and right foot are missing. A large patch has been repaired on the upper part of the figure's left thigh. Repairs are also evident on the upper and lower parts of the left leg. There is an incongruous addition to the lower part of the right leg. Old adhesive is apparent where the figure is broken and on the drapery below. The surface of the figure is pitted, scratched, and cracked. The wax is mounted on an old worm-eaten arched block of pine which retains on the square face behind the figure's back some original painted decoration consisting of a radial pattern of arabesques in gold against a dark ground with a gold border. Gift of Chambers Hall, April 1855 (Donations Book, 28). Bought by him from one of the Woodburn brothers who bought it at a sale of Sir Thomas Lawrence's collection in 1830 (see below). Probably placed on display in 1856 (cf. No. 21). The wax is recorded in the Handbook Guides of 1859 and 1865 as on display with the paintings given by Chambers Hall in what is now the Founder's Gallery. 

Michelangelo's marble statue of Aurora (Dawn) was executed between 1524 and 1531 for one side of the sarcophagus below the effigy of Lorenzo de' Medici duke of Urbino in the Medici Mausoleum in S. Lorenzo, Florence. It was never completed in the feet and drapery. An accurate small copy such as this wax might have been made as an exercise by another artist in the sixteenth, seventeenth, or eighteenth centuries. It could then have been adopted as a collector's piece, but is also finished enough to have been intended as such. Such wax copies were certainly sought after. Pierino da Vinci made one of Michelangelo's Moses for his patron in the mid-sixteenth century, and early seventeenth-century Flemish paintings of collector's cabinets show small figures in red wax among the small bronzes of varied patina-for instance, the allegory of Sight signed by Jan Brueghel in 1617 (Prado, no. 1394) which includes a red wax statuette of the Antinous about 10 cms. high and what may be pink wax statuettes, rather larger in size, of Aurora companion with one of Night (from the tomb of Giuliano de' Medici). 

The work is entered in the Museum's Donations Book, presumably in accordance with the donor's description, as 'Wax Model, original by Michael Angelo, being the figure of Night in the Medici Chapel, formerly in the possession of Sir Thomas Lawrence'. The appropriateness of adding it to a collection which included the drawings by Michelangelo which had also belonged to Lawrence is obvious. In the sale of Lawrence's collection at Christie's, London, on 19 June 1830, lot 346 was 'A Wax Model, by Michelangiolo, of one of the recumbent female figures executed by him in marble in the Sacristy of the Church of St. Lorenzo at Florence', marked down to 'Woodburn' for £14 3s. 6d. Presumably it was sold by Woodburn to Chambers Hall. Lawrence also owned a number of small groups and reliefs in wax attributed to Giambologna (ibid., lots 348, 349, 350, 357), of which two, bought at his sale by Richard Ford, survive in the collection of Sir Brinsley Ford (for one of these see No. 46). It is likely to be the reclining statuette mounted on a buhl plinth in the foreground of an anonymous engraving of Lawrence's sitting room in 65 Russell Square (K. Garlick, Sir Thomas Lawrence (Oxford, 1989), 27, fig. 4). 





@@60



Probably an Italian goldsmith, perhaps of the seventeenth century. 

After MICHELANGELO Buonarroti (1475-1564) 

60. Pietà 

14.6 cms. (height of group); 6.7 cms. (height of plinth); 12.25 cms. (length of plinth); 7.6 cms. (width of plinth) 

Bronze with a pale chocolate patina, evidently an alloy very rich in copper. Thin-walled, lost-wax, cast, open behind. All projecting elements seem to be hollow except perhaps for the right arm of Christ. The Virgin's thumb is broken off and there are dents in both of Christ's knees (damage already recorded in Fortnum's catalogues and photographs). A brown-red wax has been used to plug a small hole within the deepest fold of drapery on the proper right side of the group; other pin-sized holes remain in this area. Set in a plinth, rectangular in plan but with the front corners chamfered, made of a solid block of rosso antico with nero antico mouldings above and below. This is unlikely to be original, not least because the irregular form of the integral rock-work bronze base does not fit perfectly into the aperture for it and is surrounded by disfiguring cement. It looks like an Italian eighteenth-century plinth. The bronze is painted 'B./434. /.' in white on its hollow rear. 

Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in March 1888, given later in the same year. B. 434 in his catalogues. No. 8, p. 38, in his preliminary catalogue of 1857, where it is stated to have been bought in Rome in 1851. On a sheet entitled 'Memoranda of Prices paid' it is listed as an item acquired in or before that year, for 12 scudi, together with the small bronze Spinario and the Venus, i.e. the bathing woman after Giambologna, No. 39 (for 18 and 20 scudi), the total of 50 scudi translating as £10 12s. 6d. (The entries for these latter items in the preliminary catalogue both conclude 'Rome 51', which confirms this date.) 

Fortnum in his preliminary catalogue described this bronze as of 'very light font' and of the 'highest quality and finish'. He thought it Florentine and 'worthy of Cellini'. In the notebook catalogue he considered it late sixteenth century, 'probably' Florentine, and 'possibly' by Annibale Fontana to whom a Crucifixion in the South Kensington Museum (Victoria and Albert Museum 7440-1860) was then attributed. Finally, in his large catalogue, he suggested that it was perhaps an example of Florentine goldsmith's work of the early seventeenth century. This last proposal seems highly probable; but it might be later in date. It is a work of very meticulous and miniature workmanship, equalled in this among the Ashmolean Museum's bronzes only by Nos. 385 and 386 also early acquisitions of Fortnum's. The rippling edge of the robe, the blood from Christ's wounds, and the nails of fingers and toes are especially remarkable. 

Michelangelo's marble Pietà, today in St Peter's, Rome, was commissioned for the church of S. Petronilla, by Cardinal Jean Villiers de la Groslaye, probably in 1497 and is supposed to have been completed by 1500. If the model for this bronze was made directly from the marble then it must have been executed before 1736 when four broken fingers of the Virgin's left hand were incorrectly restored by Giuseppe Lironi the hand here corresponds to that in the sixteenth- century engravings. Small bronzes were being made after Michelangelo's marble sculpture during the sixteenth century when Pietro da Barga made one of the Risen Christ of S. Maria sopra Minerva. The Pietà was copied in marble by Nanni di Baccio Bigio for the Florentine church of S. Spirito where it was installed in March 1549, so a model for the bronze statuette could easily have been made in Florence after 

that date. 

While faithful in all essentials, the more minute particulars in the Ashmolean bronze do not correspond with those in the original. For instance, in the marble, the folds in the cloth over the Virgin's head are more broken; the Virgin's thumb as well as her fingers appears beneath Christ's right arm, and the fingers are opened; the rock-work base is more extended to the left of the base and is not so apparent in front of the group. The Ashmolean bronze is indeed less close to the group. original and far more artistic in its modifications-than the other bronze copies of the group, all of which are between two and three times larger (Frick Collection, New York- formerly Pierpont Morgan and Pfungst Collections, for which see J. Pope-Hennessy and A. F. Radcliffe, The Frick Collection ... Italian Sculpture (New York, 1970), 196–8; another with Jacques Seligmann & Co., New York, in February 1937 when loaned to Master Bronzes, an exhibition at the Albright Art Gallery, Buffalo-reproduced in the catalogue as no. 136; another sold Sotheby's, London, 10 April 1975, lot 85; and a fourth, with different drapery on the Virgin's chest, lot 111 at Christie's, London, 3 July 1985). 





@@61



Probably a French modeller and foundry of the late seventeenth century 

After MICHELANGELO Buonarroti (1475-1564) 

61. Moses 

39.8 cms. (height); 18.4 cms. (length from front of sandal to back of block); 8.1 cms. (width of block at base excluding the left foot of Moses) 

Bronze with warm slightly green brown natural patina with much varnish, in places now black, especially in the hollows. Hollow, lost- wax, cast. The walls are of irregular thickness, with small perforations in the folds of drapery where the bronze is thinnest. The figure is open below and some core remains in the prophet's left foot. In some parts the cast is imperfectly cleaned (see the folds of drapery around the neck); in others, such as the head, it is boldly but precisely chiselled. Remains of a small paper label with the word 'Coll.' printed in red are on the block in front of the prophet's left foot. Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in October 1894 and bequeathed in 1899. B. 441 in his catalogues. 'Bought at Christie's £30.' Presumably after 1857 when the preliminary catalogue, in which it is not mentioned, was compiled. Placed in the Students' Room of the Heberden Coin Room in 1956. 

Michelangelo's celebrated marble Moses was carved for the tomb of Pope Julius II. The tomb was first conceived in 1505 but the statue probably dates from 1513. It was abandoned in 1516 and set up in its present position in S. Pietro in Vincoli, Rome, in 1542. Small copies began to be made soon afterwards: according to Vasari one in wax was made by Pierino da Vinci. Fortnum supposed this 'finely executed reduction after the statue by Michel Angelo... of rich coppery metal & fine dark patina', to be Italian of the seventeenth century or of the earlier years of the eighteenth century. Fortnum's dating may well be correct, but the bronze might be French rather than Italian. In any case it is in France that bronze statuettes of the Moses are found. Most notably in the Paris Salon in 1699 (Livret, 13) a group was exhibited consisting of a Christ, Moses, and John the Baptist on a pedestal 'de marqueterie' (possibly buhl) and symbolizing the 'union de l'Ancien et du Nouveau Testament par le venue de Jesus Christ'. The Christ was by 'François Flamand' (that is 'Il Fiammingo', Duquesnoy), the Moses by 'Michel Ange', and the John by M. Girardon. The 'by' is misleading and it is surely possible that all three works were modelled by Girardon, although only the last was his invention. The group also features in the engravings, and in the posthumous inventory, of Girardon's collection-'le tout de Bronze mais sur un pied d'Estail de Marquetrie enrichi d'ornament dorez dor moulu'. The engravings reveal that Girardon rejoiced in making groups out of works of art independently conceived, but these seldom have a symbolic significance such as was suggested here. (F. Souchal, 'La Collection du sculpteur Girardon, d'après son inventaire après décès', Gazette des beaux-arts, 82 (1973), 38-9, no. 16, fig. 17). 

Bronze statuettes of Moses of both a larger and smaller size than the Ashmolean's are known: one 68.4 cms. high, thin- walled, with a ruddy varnish, was no. 35 in J. Fischer, The French Bronze 1500-1800, catalogue of an exhibition at Knoedler and Co. (New York, 1968), no. 35; another 34 cms. high, thin-walled, with a blackened red varnish, is in the reserve collection of the Victoria and Albert Museum (A.84- 1910); a third, of high quality and very close in size to the Ashmolean's bronze, was lot 139 at Sotheby's, New York, 22 June 1989. Souchal (op. cit.) notes that a bronze Moses, '11 pouces, 9 lignes de haut', was included in the Royal French inventory of 1707 (unpublished MS, fo. 899) and that one '15 pouces de haut' was in that of Cardinal Richelieu (L. Boislisle, ‘Les Collections des sculptures du Cardinal de Richelieu', Mémoires de la Société Nationale des Antiquaires de France, 42 (1881), 87). The latter converts to a measurement only half a centimetre higher than the Ashmolean's bronze so that the two are likely to be cast by the same foundry or at least from the same model. 

It is noteworthy that reproductions of Michelangelo's Moses were not among the bronze statuettes offered for sale in Rome in the late eighteenth century by Righetti and Zoffoli. On the other hand the Barbedienne foundry did make sand- cast bronzes of inferior finish and after mechanically reduced models in the mid-nineteenth century. 





@@62



Nineteenth-century foundry, probably French or Belgian After MICHELANGELO Buonarroti (1475-1564) 

62. Giuliano de' Medici 

93.6 cms. (height); 33.3 cms. (length of plinth); 36 cms. (width of plinth) 

Bronze with a natural pale greeny-brown patina. Hollow, sand-cast, in five pieces: the head; the figure's right arm from the shoulder to the hand, including the top portion of the baton; the figure's left arm from near the shoulder to the wrist; the figure's right leg, including a portion of the plinth; the rest of the figure including most of the plinth. Some of the joins are fine (that on the top of the neck especially so, although the rivet is very apparent) while others are crude. Piece-mould seams are visible in some places (e.g. his left shoulder). Much patching of casting flaws has been carried out in a different coloured alloy: the patch below the figure's left forearm is apparently of lead. The metal is imperfectly cleaned and only in a few areas of flesh, most obviously the head, is it fully polished. See also below. 

Given by R. P. B. Davies 'late of 28, Wellington Square' [Oxford]. Registered on 23 March 1960. 

The seated effigy of Giuliano de' Medici, duke of Nemours, brother of Pope Leo X, may have been first conceived by Michelangelo when he took on the planning of a new Medici Mausoleum in S. Lorenzo in 1520, and is probably the effigy which documents suggest to have been well advanced by June 1526. It was placed in its niche before the autumn of 1534. This effigy was the most finished of the figures in the chapel (only the projecting right foot requiring further work). All the allegories and effigies of the Medici Mausoleum were much reproduced in France in the nineteenth century from models reduced by the machine invented by Collas which were cast by the Barbedienne foundry. The figures of Day and Night had been appropriately adapted as clock ornaments in both the early and late eighteenth century (see H. Ottomeyer and P. Pröschel, Vergoldete Bronzen, 2 vols. (Munich, 1986), i. 45 and 296; ii. 481). In the middle of the nineteenth century Collas and Barbedienne devised a massive chimney-piece clock involving not only the allegories of the times of day but the effigy of Lorenzo as 'Le Silence', approximately 30 inches high. The Barbedienne catalogue of 1862 includes all six statues from the Medici tombs (see M.-T. Baudry, Ministère de la Culture, La Sculpture (Paris, 1978), 326). Other foundries also reproduced these figures, among them the firm of Sauvage, which also incorporated Lorenzo's effigy into a mantel clock (see lot 98, Christie's, London, 28 September 1989), and the 'Compagnie des Bronzes Bruxelles', one of whose casts of Lorenzo, 71 cms. in height, was lot 62W, Sotheby's, London, 10 June 1988, and another, of the same size, lot 302W, Sotheby's, London, 5-6 November 1987. The Ashmolean Museum's bronze of Giuliano is unmarked but this is unsurprising since it is also unfinished. Given the patching, a darker artificial patina was obviously meant to be applied, but there would also have been much tooling to sharpen the detail and to make the joins less apparent. However improved, it is hard to believe that this would ever have been mistaken for anything other than a mechanical reduction and one made from a plaster cast. Undercutting is avoided, for instance in the baton, and the drapery escaping from the armour on the figure's left has 

not been understood. 





@@63



Style of MICHELANGELO Buonarroti (1475-1564) 

63. Keyhole escutcheon in the form of a grotesque winged mask 

8.9 cms. (height); 11.8 cms. (width, wing-tip to wing-tip) 

Bronze, fire-gilt. 

Attached to the 'Fitzwilliam Coin Cabinet', for which see No. 35. 

CHCR1949.5.31.39) 

As discussed elsewhere in this Catalogue (under No. 35), some of the ormolu mounts on the pietra dura cabinet are likely to be original. The scroll feet, tendril volutes, and leaves may well be cast after models by Giovanni Battista Foggini but this escutcheon perhaps came from another, earlier, piece of Florentine furniture. It is a typical variation on a theme in Michelangelo's art, best represented by the front and back of the breastplate of the effigy of Giuliano de' Medici in the Medici Chapel in S. Lorenzo, Florence (for which see No. 62). Whereas such grotesque masks are most characteristic of the second half of the sixteenth century they continued to be popular in Florence in the seventeenth century and a distinct echo of them is found in some designs of the eighteenth century such as the handles of vases by Clodion (see Nos. 262, 263) or the keyhole escutcheon of the silver microscope of about 1763 made for King George IV when prince of Wales by George Adams (Science Museum, London). 





@@64&65



Egidio MORETTI (active between 1611 and 1638, d. after 1651) 

64 and 65. Pair of Romans in consular dress 

213 cms. (height of No. 64, including integral plinth); 8 cms. (height of 64's integral plinth); 56 cms. (length of 64's integral plinth); 216.5 cms. (height of No. 65, including integral plinth); 10 cms. (height of 65's integral plinth); 77 cms. (length of 65's integral plinth) 

White marble of uncertain origin. The surface is severely weathered and discoloured with ingrained dirt (especially in the case of No. 65). There is a horizontal crack in No. 64 at hip level. The head of No. 64 looks original but was 'pieced' (carved from a different block of marble) and inserted with the neckline of the drapery concealing the join. It is now loose and the join is very evident. A rusty iron cramp is exposed behind the neck. The scroll held in the figure's left hand and two fingers and the thumb of the hand itself have been broken off and replaced, with considerable additions in plaster. The irregular shape of the plinth is unlikely to be original. The head of No. 65 appears to have been carved out of the same block as the body and the plinth but has been broken off and replaced: a large chip below the break is missing. The nose has been restored: the replacement is loose and of a darker colour. A large part of both forearms has been broken off and is missing. The figure's right stump has been cut and drilled to receive a new forearm and an iron cramp, but neither are now in place. 

Given to Oxford University by the dowager countess of Pomfret (see Nos. 516, 517) in 1755. For the provenance see Nos. 66 and 67. The statues may be discerned in William Westall's drawing of the sculpture gallery in the Old Schools signed in 1813. After transfer to the University Galleries they were certainly among the statues described in the Crypt or Sub-Gallery but whereas one is surely described there as 'a statue of a Roman Consul', the identity of the other is uncertain-it may be 'a statue of Demosthenes' 

(Handbook Guide (1859), 23). No. 64 was taken out of storage in the mid-1970s and placed on display in a niche in the Randolph 

Gallery on the initiative of Michael Vickers. 

For Moretti and Arundel see Nos. 66 and 67. Although apparently not intended by Arundel as portraits, one at least of these statues had, like both companion Roman warriors, assumed a specific identity by the eighteenth century. Vertue described one of them as 'A statue very noble, and bigger than the life of Quintus Fabius Maximus, in his senatorial robes (a true antique as are both the Scipios), the 1. hand is wanting, the r. held up in a speaking posture'. The other was merely ‘a fine statue of a Senator in his robes' (quoted in J. Hess, 'Lord Arundel in Rom und sein Auftrag an den Bildhauer Egidio Moretti', English Miscellany, 1 (1950), 209). It is surprising that Vertue considered the statues to be antique. That the figures were modern does, however, seem to have been acknowledged in Oxford for Chandler did not include them in his Marmora Oxoniensia of 1763. It had been forgotten again by the time of the Handbook Guide of 1859 in which they are recorded as antique. Michaelis regarded No. 65 as 'very effective, but the whole statue seems to be new' and No. 64 to be of 'similar style' but 'coarser execution' and 'likewise the work of a very clever modern imitator'. Michaelis noted that No. 64 was wearing the pallium, the common outer garment of a Greek citizen, and 65 the Roman toga, although in an unusual arrangement (Ancient Marbles in Great Britain (Cambridge, 1882), 553-4, nos. 46 and 47), but it is clear from Arundel's contract with Moretti that both figures were intended to represent Romans in consular dress. 





@@66&67



Egidio MORETTI (active between 1611 and 1638; d. after 1651) 

66 and 67. Pair of Roman warriors 

224 cms. (height of No. 66 including integral plinth); 11 cms. (height of 66's integral plinth); 76.5 cms. (length of 66's integral plinth); 226.5 cms. (height of No. 67, including integral plinth); 8.5 cms. (height of 67's integral plinth); 79 cms. (length of 67's integral plinth) 

White marble of uncertain origin. The surface is severely weathered and discoloured with ingrained dirt (especially in the case of No. 67). There is a crack across the plinth of No. 66. A large chip is missing from the front of the helmet, and also from the drapery at the figure's right elbow. The pommel and the blade of the sword have been broken off and do not survive. The figure's left arm has also been lost; its stump retains an old hole for securing an addition and the marble may have originally been pieced here. In the case of No. 67 a large portion of the cloak crossing the chest has been broken off and lost, as has the figure's left arm and the sword in his right hand, together with part of the hand itself. The nose and lower lip are missing, the surface of both places has been cut to a convenient flat surface, scored, and fitted with an iron cramp from which restorations have since become detached. A small iron cramp is also evident in the figure's right hand. 'AEGIDUS. MORETTUS. / ROMMANUS.FACIEBAT' is chiselled on the side of each plinth to proper left. 

Given to Oxford University by the dowager countess of Pomfret (see Nos. 516, 517) in 1755. The sculptures are the 'homini armati' which Moretti contracted to make for Thomas Howard, 2nd earl of Arundel, on 10 June 1614 in Rome together with a pair 'in abito alla consolari' (Nos. 64 and 65) and which were all completed by 25 January 1617 (J. Hess, 'Lord Arundel in Rom und sein Auftrag an den Bildhauer Egidio Moretti', English Miscellany, 1 (1950), 199-200; also, for a transcription of the contract, D. Howarth, Lord Arundel and his Circle (New Haven, Conn., and London, 1985), 229-30 n. 40). The statues were acquired with a large portion of the Arundel marbles by Lady Pomfret's father-in-law Sir William Fermor (later Lord Lempster) from the 6th duke of Norfolk in 1691 and were for some years kept in the gardens of the family seat of Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, although by 1632 they had 'latterly almost all' been taken within doors ("The Vertue Notebooks', iv, Walpole Society, 24 (1935–6), 40). In Oxford the statues were displayed in the Old Schools and then transferred to the University Galleries where they are recorded in the Handbook Guide of 1859 in the Crypt or Sub-Gallery but visible to the public (pp. 23-4 as 'statues of Roman Emperors', nos. 113 and 119). They remained on display until the 1870s when they seem to have been put in store. In the late 1940s they were declared to be 'lost' (one enquirer observed that the Museum's basement must have been remarkably compendious for colossal statues to disappear in them). They were traced by the mid-1970s when one statue of this pair, No. 66, was placed on display in a niche in the Randolph Gallery on the initiative of Michael Vickers. 

Egidio Moretti was a minor sculptor working in Rome in the early seventeenth century. He is documented as supplying sculpture for the Borghese Chapel in S. Maria sopra Minerva in 1611 and statues for the skyline of the façade of St Peter's in 1613, also as restoring antiquities for the Quirinal Palace in 1623 and making a tomb for S. Bartolomeo in 1638 (Hess, op. cit. 213-14; see also S. Pressouyre, Nicolas Cordier, 2 vols. (Rome, 1984), i. 219 n., 303 n., and ii. 393). The contract between him and 'Signor Tommaso' was for the four statues (these two warriors and the two men in consular dress, Nos. 64 and 65) to be ten palmi high and made within ciascuna statua finita a year —‘160 di moneta di paolo 10 nel modo sopradetto: in questo modo cioc scudi 60 ogni tre mesi anticipata da comminciare dal giorno che comminciera il lavoro et cosi sequitare fino al intiero pagamento facendo pero il lavoro che merita et denaro che se gli dara'. It is surprising that Arundel employed such a minor sculptor, but Moretti may have seemed to be a promising young man and when Arundel arrived in Rome in 1613, the better-established sculptors, such as Stefano Maderno, Pietro Bernini, and Nicolas Cordier, were fully employed. He may also have employed Moretti as restorer of the antique statues which he had acquired or which he hoped to acquire in Rome (certainly those exported in his name in 1626 were restored, as is clear from the document cited in No. 139). The four statues were evidently designed to be displayed in niches or against a wall for although the backs are finished they are of no interest. Contracts are not always an infallible guide to the precise identity of works of art but, if portraits of particular Romans were intended, then it seems likely that this would have been mentioned. By the eighteenth century, however, Vertue described them as 'Two fine statues of the Two Scipio's in their general's habit, very perfect and exceeding fine' (quoted in Hess, op. cit. 209). He believed them to be 'true' antiques, but when in Oxford they must have been recognized as modern works Moretti's name is on the plinths and Lord Arundel's heraldic animals are carved on the fringes of the cuirasses and they were not included in Chandler's Marmora Oxoniensia of 1763. In character they may be compared with the statues of Romans, and of modern rulers in the guise of Romans, found, for example, in Palladio's Teatro Olimpico in Vicenza, in the Sala del Duecento of Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, and, above all, in the Palazzo dei Conservatori in Rome-some, if not all, of which Arundel must have seen. The style of armour, the belt over the cuirass, and the treatment of the cloak recall Cordier's great bronze statue of King Henry IV of France erected in the Lateran in 1609 and the helmets on the plinths recall those in his unfinished statue of St Sebastian of 1604-5 in the Aldobrandini Chapel in S. Maria sopra Minerva (Pressouyre, op. cit., pls. 64 and 136). 





@@68



Francesco Maria NOCCHIERI (active mid- to late seventeenth century) 

68. Apollo, seated holding his lyre, attentive to the Muses 

46 cms. (height); 25.75 cms. (length of base); 17.2 cms. (width of base) 

Red terracotta with a pale pinky grey slip thickest where gathered in the hollows so that the salient ridges of the hair and clawed texture of the ground are pronounced. The projecting drapery is broken off behind the figure's right arm, as is the foremost loop of the drapery behind his left arm; the figure's right hand has been broken off very neatly. 

Purchased apparently in 1950, but never registered and 'mislaid' 1965-6 (see below). 

Queen Christina of Sweden commissioned a marble statue of Apollo from Nocchieri to complete a group of eight antique Muses which she had acquired. She projected a Chamber of the Muses for the sculptures in her palace (formerly Palazzo Riario, subsequently Palazzo Corsini) in the Via della Lungara in Rome after she was installed there in July 1659. The Muses were placed between sixteen Corinthian columns of giallo antico with gilded stucco captials against frescoes of landscapes the Apollo was on a broader base in the centre of the short wall opposite the chief entrance (Christina Queen of Sweden-a Personality of European Civilization (Nationalmuseum, Stockholm, 29 June-16 Oct. 1966), 321, no. 741, pl. 62). Little is known of Nocchieri. He was a protégé of Cardinal Azzolini coming, like Azzolini, from the Marche, and is said to have died young. He executed the monument commemorating Queen Christina's visit to the Capitol in 1656 (Sala dei Magistrati, Palazzo dei Conservatori)—a work of very poor design featuring a very unhappily modelled and poorly executed bust of the Queen. The terracotta is a work of a different order. The still life at the god's feet alone suggests exceptional talent. 

The queen's collection was bequeathed in 1689 to Cardinal Azzolini, who died a few weeks afterwards, and was then sold (for the most part) in 1692 by his heir, Marchese Pompeo Azzolini, to Don Livio Odescalchi, nephew of Pope Innocent XI. In 1713 Odescalchi's collection was inherited by his cousin Baldassare d'Erba who sold the Apollo and Muses to Philip V of Spain in 1724. The Muses are now in the Prado in Madrid while the Apollo has, for over half a century, 

formed part of a fountain in the gardens of the Palace of Aranjuez. His rock-work seat crowns a miniature mountain of similar rocks cut into steps in front down which water can run into a basic fringed with simulated stalactitic rock. Behind the god is a curved screen of six Corinthian columns connecting two piers crowned by putti supporting bases. 

The Ashmolean Museum's terracotta was acquired with an attribution to Michelangelo Slodtz. It was recognized as a bozzetto for Nocchieri's Apollo by Ian Lowe, Assistant Keeper in the Department, in February 1966 after he had seen a slide of an engraving of the latter in one of Carl Nordenfalk's Slade Lectures. Thanking Mr Lowe for communicating this discovery on 5 March Professor Nordenfalk asked that the terracotta be added to the list of items in the Ashmolean Muscum which the Council of Europe were requesting for the exhibition on Queen Christina at the Nationalmuseum in Stockholm. On 9 March Mr Lowe replied that, after an extensive search, the terracotta could no longer be found. On 17 June, Luke Herrmann, another Assistant Keeper, reported to Nordenfalk that the terracotta had been retrieved, having been advertised by a 'London dealer' in the English Art Journal. It had been stolen from the Museum. Because the matter was 'in the hands of the police' the statuette could not be loaned. 

Comparison with photographs of the marble statue kindly sent to the Museum in November 1986 by the Patrimonio Nacional show that there are only minor differences in the marble version the lyre has an acanthus leaf ornament on its 

arms, the rock-work is of a different pattern so that the god's right foot is placed higher, the quiver beside his right foot is reversed so that, now that it is on a slope, the arrows do not slip out (most of the bow is missing but seems to have been of the same type), the posture and character of the head with its pronounced corymbos approximate more closely to those of the Apollo Belvedere, and the left hand is placed differently on top of the lyre. This last-mentioned difference may 

however be due to erroneous restoration, for the hand of the marble Apollo is missing (as are some of the fingers of his right hand) in the photograph kindly sent to the Museum by Jennifer Montagu on 9 October 1967 ('a small present from Spain, just in case you mislay the terracotta again'). The god's left hand as represented in the (admittedly not entirely reliable) print by Francesco Aquila, plate CXI in the Raccolta di statue antiche e moderne, published by Domenico de' Rossi in Rome in 1704, is closer to the terracotta than to the marble as it is today. The print also shows a plectrum in the god's right hand which has been restored in the marble version with the open gesture of the Apollo Belvedere. This plectrum would be an unlikely addition for Aquila to make and it is also mentioned by P. A. Maffei in his commentary on the plate. Maffei (p. 104) describes Nocchieri as a 'discepolo del Cavalier Bernini'. He also makes the amazing claim that the Apollo is a portrait of the queen of Sweden-'e gli fece nel volto i lineamenti della medesima Reina, che veramente dir si potea la madre delle muse'. 

A sample was taken from the figure by Mrs Doreen Stoneham of the Oxford Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art in March 1987 and thermo-luminescence tests suggested a firing date between 1677 and 1787 (ref. 381-z-95). 

Nocchieri, Apollo Aranjuez, Spain 





@@69



Possibly NOVE factory near Bassano (flourished from 1760s) 

69. Hercules resting 

22.2 cms. (height); 18.6 cms. (length of base excluding the projecting foot); 15.7 cms. (width of base) 

Hard-paste porcelain. The hollow figure has been filled with cement to consolidate it. The glaze has been worn in the hair. The figure's right foot is discoloured yellow. There is a firing crack beside the club on the base, another in the figure's left heel, beside the lion skin over the base to the proper left, and another more serious, across the back of the base. 'NON PLUS / ULTRA' is incised in the model on the side of the base beside the figure's right leg. There are two holes in the rock-work platform behind the figure. That to proper left is approximately one centimetre in diameter-that to proper right was intended to be the same size but coincides with a firing crack. '1971.328' is painted in red on the underside of the figure. 

Bequeathed by W. R.B. Young in October 1971 together with a considerable collection of porcelain, mostly Meissen and Chelsea. This item was said to have come from the collection of the earl of Shrewsbury, Ingestre Hall. Mr Young was a retired solicitor who was, for some while before his death, a resident of St Cross Hospital, Winchester, a Church of England home for the destitute, from which he had concealed his wealth and the value of his collection- 'really only a poor jackdaw's collection', 'made since the Hitler War out of a very small income' (letters to the Department of 27 February 1962 and 3 February 1969). 

In Mr Young's own list of his collection made on 14 September 1968 in blue biro on blue paper this figure was described as 'Buen Retiro' (? Capo di Monte)'. The 'Buen Retiro' was struck out by Mr Lowe, in whose hand also the provenance recorded above was added ('Lord Shrewsbury'). Young had been a friend of George Savage, the well-known ceramic expert, and the attribution may have come from him. There is another version of the figure in the collection of Sir Brinsley Ford which comes from the collection of his ancestor Richard Ford (1796-1858) and has an old label inscribed 'The Famous Torso / of the Belvedere / in the Vatican / by Apolonius'. A third version is in the Metropolitan Museum, New York (Charles E. Sampson Memorial Fund, 1981.412; published Notable Acquisitions (1981-2), 29-30). Of this last version it has been observed that 'the clear white hard paste and lustrous glaze are not those of Doccia or Cozzi; the presence of numerous fire-cracks suggests a factory not yet in control of work of this kind... It may have been made at Le Nove, northwest of Venice, in the little known early period of that factory' (entry by C. le Corbeiller in Notable Acquisitions cited above). This attribution is strengthened by the Ashmolean and Ford examples which are of different, darker body and have a less lustrous glaze. The treatment of the rock-work base and the robust classicism of the figure is similar to that of some of the ambitious earthenware groups produced by the Nove factory - such as the allegorical ensemble of three virtues in the Museo Civico, Bassano del Grappa (reproduced in J. Fleming and H. Honour, The Penguin Dictionary of Decorative Arts (London, 1977), 566). No explanation for the space and the holes behind Hercules seems to have been advanced but it might have been devised to enable the figure to be attached to an ensemble of precisely this kind. Despite the connection, made already in the early nineteenth-century label on the example in the Ford Collection, with the Belvedere Torso (for which see No. 135), the similarity is not remarkable. 