@@70&71

Probably by Giuseppe PIAMONTINI (1664–1742) 
70 and 71. Jupiter riding upon his eagle and Juno reposing upon the clouds holding her sceptre and peacock 
44.4 cms. (height of No. 70); 46.5 cms. (height of No. 71); 17.4 cms. (length of base of 70); 16.9 cms. (width of base of 70); 20.2 cms. (length of base of 71); 18.5 cms. (width of base of 71) 
Bronze with a chestnut brown patina, with very dark brown varnish, golden brown in parts and perhaps originally golden all over. Hollow, cast in pieces. In the case of No. 71, the clouds and, in the case of No. 70, the clouds and eagle are separately cast, although the joins are almost invisible (but the right foot of Juno clearly was not cast with the clouds below). In the case of Juno her sceptre is cast separately (see below), also her right forearm and her left arm at contact with drapery in the former case, just below it in the other. Jupiter's right arm is separately cast and joined just below his shoulder (the line is almost invisible, but is more apparent in the Philadelpha version). The head and torso of the Jupiter is cast separately from the drapery and legs. The upper portion of the body of Juno is cast separately from the lower part which is probably cast with the peacock-the join is concealed by the tail of drapery blown across the upper thighs. Much evidence of tooling; the hair, plumage, and clouds chiselled and punched. 
Given by Mrs J. C. Conway in 1959. Registered on 18 December 1959. The sceptre of Juno ('which turned up at Spring cleaning time') given in July 1960. Stated by the Keeper, Ian Robertson, in the Annual Report for 1960 to have 'come from the Borghese Palace Collection in Rome'. The Borghese provenance must be considered unproven. It is given for both bronzes (nos. 87 and 91) and for two others (nos. 88 and 90, a Venus and Cupid and a Bacchus and Ariadne) in the Bardini catalogue (Catalogue des objets d'art provenant de la collection Bardini dont la vente aura lieu à Londres chez Mr Christie (Florence, 1899) and separate plate volume, pl. IV). They were sold together as lot 434, Christie's, London, 5-7 June 1899. The provenance was then repeated when the figures reappeared as 'Jupiter and Juno... a pair of Louis XIV groups' lot 174 of the sale at Christie's, London, of 'the Collection of Fine French Furniture Objects of Art and Porcelain formed by L. Neumann Esq and removed from 11 Grosvenor Sq.' when they were purchased by 'Clements' (code for Wertheimer) for £714. They were offered again at Christie's on 16-17 June 1920-the sale sale of 'the remaining stock of French Furniture, Porcelain and Objects of Art of Mr Asher Wertheimer Deceased late of 158 New Bond Street'. Bought in by Mrs Conway's husband (who had changed his name from Wertheimer). The bronzes seem always to have been on display: at first on pedestals in the Fortnum Gallery: more recently in the Weldon Gallery. 
The two groups were registered and recorded in the Annual Report as 'probably the work of Michel Anguier (1612-86) ... related to a considerably larger pair of fire-dogs in the Wallace Collection, which are by Ar.guier after Alessandro Algardi'. An almost identical pair of the figures in the Philadelphia Museum of Art (Wilstach Collection, W. 68-1- 1 and W. 68-1-2) were attributed to Giovanni Battista Foggini. The attribution to Piamontini was proposed by Jennifer Montagu in 'Some Small Sculptures by Giuseppe Piamontini', Antichità viva (1974), unpaginated. Piamontini studied under Giovanni Battista Foggini and, from 1681 until 1686, attended the Academy founded in Rome by the Grand Duke Cosimo III, working under Ercole Ferrata on tomb sculpture, narrative reliefs, large statues of saints, and portrait busts. According to his own account, groups and statues of marble and bronze by him were sent (presumably from Florence) ‘in Roma, Bolognia, Prussia, Londra, al Reno, e Scozzia, e Inghilterra' (Autobiographical note printed in K. Lankheit, Florentinische Barockplastik (Munich, 1962), doc. 46, p. 232). 
Montagu noted that among the models in the inventory made for the Doccia ceramic factory established in 1743 by Senator Carlo Ginori were three attributed to Piamontini: a 'Giove con Aquila, sulla base', corresponding, she proposed, with the polychromed porcelain figure in the Museo Civico, Turin (her fig. 4), and an 'altro Giove piu piccolo sedente sull'Aquila' together with a 'Giunone', which, she proposed, correspond with the bronzes in the Ashmolean. A Jupiter group is also mentioned among Piamontini's models by Baldinucci. A version of the bronze group on a wall bracket is to be seen in Thomas Patch's painting of a party of dilettanti at the home of Sir Horace Mann (Chatsworth, Derbyshire). Ceramic versions would presumably have served a similar purpose, but the bronzes probably originated as ornaments for fire-dogs (Jupiter with his thunderbolt representing the flames, and Juno the air which a good fire requires), and were certainly inspired by groups modelled by Algardi for this purpose. The suggestion that the bronzes might be made in France is also understandable since Parisian founders were to become masters at joining bronzes cast in numerous pieces (see No. 341), a task which is accomplished so skilfully here. This method of construction is also characteristic of Florentine foundries, for example, in the bronze versions of Massimiliano Soldani's groups and reliefs which are likely to be of the same date as Piamontini's. Soldani's bronzes are also similarly sharply chiselled and punched. Whether Piamontini would have directed the casting and participated in the finishing of his bronze is uncertain, but not unlikely given the practice of other Florentine sculptors of this period. 
The only differences between the groups in Oxford and Philadelphia, apart from the loss of the sceptre in the Philadelphia Juno group, and the defective crest on the peacock in the Oxford Juno group, are minute ones in the pattern of the tooling-joins and solder smear are also more easily seen in the Philadelphia groups partly because metal and varnish are less dark. 


@@72
 
PIERINO DA VINCI (1530-53) 
72. Ugolino, imprisoned by the Arno, with his sons and grandsons, visited by Famine 
62 cms. (height); 45 cms. (width); see also below 
White wax discoloured to a yellow cream colour. The reverse is partly hollowed: the hollows corresponding to the highest relief on the side viewed. This reveals that the wax was cast; but it was also extensively modelled, for many details, most notably the fingers of Arno's left hand on his urn or those of the right hand of the seated youth whose knees touch the left-hand border of the composition, are completely undercut, and the entire surface has been sharply tooled, as is clear on close inspection in a good light and still more so under magnification. There is a network of cracks on the left- hand side of the relief: from the left elbow of the personification of Famine to the right shoulder of the seated youth already referred to, across the left knee of the other seated youth behind him, and (very fine) along the left thigh of the reclining youth; across the rocky river bank and river in the lower left corner; across the left foot of Ugolino. The fingers, excepting the index finger, of Arno's left hand have been broken off and refixed. Incised on the rocky river bank: 'DANTE XXXIII INFERNO'. Some spoonings of wax have been removed from the reverse of the relief perhaps to serve, reworked, as cement for repairs-a more recent (cleaner coloured) wax is apparent along the major cracks. The irregularly rectangular relief is fixed into an old wooden frame with cement and old hand-made nails. The front of the wax is cut back within its rough edges to a sharp edge forming an approximate rectangle of the dimensions given above. The relief is mounted in a heavy glazed walnut frame with partially gilt egg and dart mouldings probably made by the Museum in the 1940s (see No. 55). A letter from Arthur Evans to Fortnum of 5 November 1897 mentions that 'its dirt was dreadful but I suggested a gentle application of soda & water which has had most successful results'. 
Deposited in the Ashmolean Museum by the Radcliffe Trustees in 1897; presented to the University of Oxford in 1841 by Philip B. Duncan, Keeper of the Ashmolean, to whom it had been presented by his friend Prince Hoare (1755-1834), the artist, who had inherited it from William Hoare (1706-92), who may have acquired it from Henry Trench. 'Mr Trent a painter' is said in John Breval's Remarks on Several Parts of Europe of 1738 to have bought this 'noble Bas-relief' over to England 'some years ago'—this was, apparently, shortly before 1719 when Jonathan Richardson the Elder published his Discourse on the Dignity, Certainty, Pleasure and Advantage of the Science of Connoisseurship in which (pp. 32–3) he mentions the relief as in the hands of 'Mr Trench, a Modest, Ingenious Painter, lately arriv'd from his long Studies in Italy'. (The only problem with this provenance, apart from any firm evidence of where Hoare acquired it, is that neither Breval nor Richardson specify that Trench's relief is of wax.) 
Vasari described how Pierino, the nephew of Leonardo da Vinci, studied with Bandinelli and then with Tribolo, by whom he was recognized as a prodigy, and how Luca Martini, a scholarly nobleman and one of Duke Cosimo's leading courtiers, made him his protégé. Martini commissioned a marble relief of Christ at the Column when Pierino was less than 17 (14×3 braccia, possibly to be identified with the rather smaller but obviously cut-down oval Flagellation relief at the Nelson Atkins Museum, Kansas City, 51-3, generally regarded as by Vincenzo Danti). Martini also introduced Pierino to Francesco Bandini who took him to Rome where he enjoyed great success (and made, among much else, a wax copy of Michelangelo's Moses as a present for Martini). Then he summoned him to Pisa, of which city Cosimo had made him provveditore in 1547, and gave him several commissions there. Of the latter commissions the most private one, an idea of Pierino's own but reflecting Martini's scholarly commentary on Dante, and his interest in Pisa, was a relief illustrating the fate, in a Pisan prison, of the Florentine Count Ugolino della Gherardesca recounted by Dante in the thirty- third Canto of the Inferno. Vasari describes this work at length, mentioning also that Pierino began work on it at the same time that he carved the river god now in the Louvre presented by Martini to the Duchess Eleonora (who presented it to her brother). The relief must date from after 15 October 1548 when, as Jonathan Nelson has pointed out to me, Martini borrowed an ancient manuscript version of Dante and commenced his annotations. 
Vasari specifies that the model was in wax and was subsequently cast in bronze to the delight of his patron. Whether the casting was managed by Pierino himself may be doubted (Vasari records that the children Pierino had modelled for the rim of the Hercules fountain by Tribolo at the Medici Villa at Castello had been cast by Zanobi Lastricati). The emphasis placed on the wax model by Vasari suggests that it was valued in its own right and also that such a model survived the casting process. If the original wax model was the one employed in the casting then it would of course have been lost in the process, but it seems most unlikely that the sculptor would not have retained a replica of this original wax model, not least as a precaution against a foundry accident. Such a replica would perhaps have been worked from an approximate cast made after the first model; and that is exactly what this wax would seem to be. This hypothesis would be supported by the survival of other wax models preparatory to bronze reliefs of this period, and one does not have to look far to find examples: the models in red wax (Victoria and Albert Museum, 328, 329, 330-1879) for the reliefs in the Grimaldi Chapel of S. Franceso di Castelletto in Genoa commissioned from Giambologna in the late 1570s are as highly finished as this relief (although in less good condition), but cannot be reproductions of the bronzes since they differ from them in minor respects. On the other hand wax reliefs were also cast for collectors as alternatives to casts in terracotta, reproducing popular works also available in bronze or precious metal. The export of such casts in red, black, and white wax is mentioned as an important part of the sculptor's business in the litigation concerning Cobbert's models in Rome in 1609 (A. Bertolotti, Artisti lombardi a Roma (Milan, 1881), ii. 123-61). If this wax does not come into this category then the only other explanation for its existence is that it was prepared for casting in bronze. This would incidentally explain the hollowed reverse, designed to avoid uneven thickness and consequent strain in cooling. This is what Fortnum believed it to be (letter to Arthur Evans of 12 December 1897). 
Even if this wax is made after the bronze, however, it has been finished with quite extraordinary care. When examined closely, and especially under magnification, every detail has been tooled and the undercutting is formidable. It has sometimes been described as a later cast, or even as an aftercast, by careless scholars, or by dealers. Many of the latter and some of the former have made large claims for the other surviving versions of the relief in terracotta, gesso, and marble, which, however, all omit or slur details included with crisp clarity in the wax-none of them, for example, includes the long, very low relief, fingernail of the pointing hand of Famine; they all either exclude or confuse the lion's head peeping out beside Arno's urn; and, perhaps most significantly, none of them includes any of the undercutting. Furthermore, when details are measured it will be found that all these other reliefs are considerably smaller, as would be expected if they were cast from moulds made after the original bronze, or, in the case of the marble versions, copied from models made in this way, for bronze and terracotta both contract when cooling. 
Of the other versions in terracotta one is in the Ashmolean Museum (No. 73) and the other has long been in the collection of the Gherardesca family (that is Ugolino's family) in Florence. The latter was exhibited at the Mostre dei tesori segreti delle case fiorentine in Florence, June-July 1960 (no. 172, pp. 71 and 118 in the catalogue). The relief was engraved as early as 1782 (see F. Yates, 'Transformations of Dante's Ugolino', Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes (1951), pl. 17b). This print is interesting in that it extends the composition to clarify the fact that the figures are on an island in the Arno. The Gheradesca relief is illustrated, together with what appears to be its sixteenth-century frame, in Pantheon (1960), 18, p. cxix. Although superior claims have been made for the Gherardesca version, which has sometimes even been described as the original bronze, it is little different from the Ashmolean's terracotta (which also has a Florentine provenance), and is no more sharp in its details. It seems also to be the same size. In the wax version the foot of the Arno is 6.85 cms. in length but in the Ashmolean's terracotta it is 6.5 cms. In the wax the distance between the left shoulder of the youth with his back to us and the uppermost part of Ugolino's left arm is 42.35 cms., whereas it is 41.3 cms. in the Ashmolean's terracotta. 
The plaster or gesso versions appear to have been cast after these terracottas. One such was lot 36 in the sale at Christie's on 3 July 1823 of the studio of Nollekens. One, which is very coarse, is in the Bargello ('mentioned by some German authorities to be an original marble', C. F. Bell notes in the margin of Fortnum's large manuscript catalogue). Another, rather better in quality, belonged to Michael Hall Fine Arts, 6 East 79th Street, New York, in March 1969 (when advertised in the Burlington Magazine, p. cxvii). Most bronze casts also look like aftercasts-one was in a private collection in Cheltenham in September 1976 when it was taken to the Museum-in this version Arno and the reclining youth's genitalia were concealed by bullrushes or drapery; another of this character was sold at Christie's, 9 July 1979, lot 90, as 'A north Italian bronze plaque of an allegorical scene after Pietro da Barga'. The one exception, which will be considered separately below, is the cast in the collection of the duke of Devonshire which Charles Avery was the first to propose as possibly the original. 
A marble version, acquired by a New York dealer at auction in New York in 1987, is a work of some quality. It includes the teeth of Famine, although not those in the mouth of the desperate youth nearest to Ugolino, but does not attempt the undercutting of the fingers, and does not possess, in the treatment of the waves of the Arno or the curls of hair, plasticity that matches that in the wax version. There are also minor differences tending to simplify the details-the reeds by the river side are not clearly reeds for instance and are excluded from the hair of Arno. 
The relief was sometimes attributed, in the eighteenth and even nineteenth century, to Michelangelo and Prince Hoare retained this attribution. The Richardsons evidently entertained doubts about this when they published the French edition of their Works (Traité de la peinture (Amsterdam, 1728), ii. 138-40). Bottari was also to do so in his edition of Vasari of 1759-60 (iii. 354) as was Charles Rogers in his translation of the Inferno of 1782 (pp. 128-9). 
The disagreeable drawing purporting to be a preparatory idea for the relief which was purchased by the Ashmolean in 1963 (Sotheby's, London, 12 March 1963, lot 18) is hardly of a quality one would expect from Pierino. However, it, and another drawing of similar character, are curious in that they come closer to Vasari's description of the relief than the relief itself does (an observation I owe to Charles Avery). 
It remains to consider the bronze version at Chatsworth. This is set with lead into pedestal no. 99a. This pedestal, which is of oval plan, now supports the colossal bust of the Emperor Napoleon by Canova, but in the inventory of 1905 it is described as supporting the Greyhound and Puppies by Joseph Gott and it was clearly designed to do so. Gott's sculpture was one of the marbles which arrived at Chatsworth from Rome in 1825 and the pedestal is likely to have been made soon afterwards. It is of local stone in common with several others into which the 6th duke, characteristically, had miscellaneous pieces of coloured marble, and even in one case some antique coins, embedded. The duke does not mention the bronze relief in his own description of his collection which suggests that he set little store by it, and perhaps he did not buy it himself. If he did inherit it, then it is quite likely to have come, along with much else at Chatsworth, from the collection of Lord Burlington. It is interesting in this connection that Trench, who is credited with importing the relief of Ugolino into Britain-in accounts which do not describe it as a wax- was a protégé of Burlington. Vertue records that he came from Rome, where he had studied with Chiari, to London but enjoyed no success as a history painter and so went again to Italy for several years, returning to London in October 1725 ('The Vertue Notebooks', iii, Walpole Society, 20 (1933-4), 25.) The account suggests that he was likely to sell what he had collected, and if so Burlington would have been likely to buy it. 
This bronze is 65 cms. high (but the topmost edge is embedded in the stone slot in which it is set) and 46.5 cms. wide. It extends further to all sides than any other version, especially along the top where there are two holes presumably for attaching it which have been plugged. There is a bad casting flaw in the waves on the lower border of the relief to proper right which must once have been filled with wax. Although it has been impossible to inspect the rear of the bronze the character of this flaw suggests that this is a lost- wax cast. Every detail found in the Ashmolean's wax is also found here--including the lettering on the rocky bank, the 
lion's head in the lower right corner, the sharp-edged reeds flowing over the biceps of Arno, the fingernails of Famine. Arno's left hand is not undercut but it is in the same attitude It is hard to consider this as anything other than Pierino's original. The measurement of Arno's foot is the same as in the wax; other measurements are a little larger in some cases and smaller in others. This does not clarify its relationship with the wax, but clearly both it and the wax are to be distinguished in size as well as quality from all other known versions. Charles Avery has proposed to me that the wax w perhaps cast in the eighteenth century from the Chatswort bronze but that does not explain why some details (most notably Arno's left hand) are finer in the wax. 
 

@@73

After PIERINO DA VINCI (1530–53) 
73. Ugolino, imprisoned by the Arno, with his sons and grandsons, visited by Famine 
61 cms. (height); 45 cms. (width) 
Terracotta of a grey red colour. Cast, but with some lines tooled before the clay was fired―e.g. in the contour of the reclining youth. There is a chip on Ugolino's left knee. The relief has been broken into three parts: a rough line, passing under Ugolino's right arm and over the head of the youth beside him which then divides to pass up to the pointing hand of Famine and down to the upper chest of the prominent seated youth and to the back of the youth behind him, indicates the repair; there is a certain amount of filling and applied colour at points on this line. 'S.28. F' is written in black ink on the rocks in the lower left corner. There is a seal with arms 
and coronet on the reverse. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888, given by him later in the same year. S. 28 in his catalogues. Purchased by him in Florence in the winter of 1864-5 for £12. 'For many years in the house of a Del Agata in Via Ghibellina' in Florence. 
See No. 72. 
 

@@74

Unknown founder 
Probably after PIERINO DA VINCI (1530-53) 
74. Male nude probably intended for Adam tempted 
17 cms. (height); 9.5 cms. (height of pedestal); 8.4 cms. (width and length of pedestal) 
Bronze with a pale green to grey brown natural patina darkened in the hollows, covered with a warm golden translucent lacquer preserved in many areas. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. The surface covered with very fine wire-brushed lines following the contours except on the figure's right forearm where a fine joint may just be perceived: this part was evidently separately cast and given the lack of continuity of finish was doubtless a later replacement. There is a small firing crack in the bicep of the figure's left arm. Plugs (presumably replacing holes made by chaplets) can be detected above the figure's right arm, also above his left knee where there is a very slight crack. The figure is mounted on a moulded pedestal, square in plan, of mahogany veneer of three tones, the recessed panels and mouldings darkest. The lighter, golden wood matches the lacquer of the bronze. '[EF ligature]421' is painted in black. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888. Given later in the same year. B. 421 in his catalogues 'Bought in London' (according to his large manuscript catalogue), but more precisely 'Bought at Christie' (according to his earlier notebook catalogue), presumably after 1857 when the preliminary catalogue, in which it is not included, was compiled. 
Fortnum speculated that this 'nude man walking and in anxious attitude' might be intended as Adam. Certainly the figure seems to be responding to another as in numerous instances of paired nudes, representing Adam and Eve at the moment of their temptation or, more commonly, of his temptation, in prints and statuettes of bronze and boxwood, produced in the first half of the sixteenth century north of the Alps-the pair of bronze figures attributed to Leonhard Magt, lot 32 at Sotheby's, London, 10 December 1987; the pair of boxwood figures attributed to Conrad Meit in the Kunsthistoriches Museum, Vienna (295; 9888/9); the pair of boxwood figures attributed to Christoph Weidith in the same museum (317; 3965 and 3967); or those attributed to Daniel Mauch in the Cleveland Museum of Art (46.429 and 46.491), are good examples of the statuettes. Such groups were also found in Italy at least in the second half of the century in bronze (see W. Bode, Italian Bronze Statuettes of the Renaissance (London, 1907-12), ii. 23–4, pl. CLX; ii. 20, pl. CXLVIII; iii. 23, pl. CCLVII), and there was also the marble group of Adam and Eve made by Bandinelli in 1551 for the Duomo in Florence (Museo Nazionale, Florence). 
The sculptor is more difficult to guess than the subject. Fortnum catalogues the figure as 'the work probably of a goldsmith sculptor of the later XVI century, a follower of the schools of Gio: di Bologna or of Ben Cellini'. Bell however recorded in the margin of the large catalogue that Bode suggested that it was French. Ian Robertson later wrote there that the figure was 'probably by Hubert Gerhard'. A northern European artist has generally been suggested since then, perhaps because of the beard which compares very closely, for example, with that given to Adam by Zacharias Hegewald in his marble group of 1630-1 (destroyed 1945 but reproduced J. Rasmussen, Barockplastik in Norddeutschland (Museum für Kunst und Gewerbe, Hamburg, 1977), 46), and also because its extreme precision and beauty of surface are characteristic of documented German court goldsmiths. Hans Weihrauch suggested that it is by a Netherlandish goldsmith and of c.1600 (Europäische Bronzestatuetten (Brunswick, 1967), 363, pl. 439). 
There seems, however, no reason why the statuette should not be, as Fortnum proposed, Italian. Although ideal nude figures were less likely to be influenced in Italy by modern. fashions in facial hair, the beard here is not unlike that which Bandinelli gave to his Adam. There is also plenty of evidence that exquisite and miniature work was made by Italian goldsmiths even if names and works can seldom be matched. The golden varnish employed on this figure is also known to have been popular in Florence in the late sixteenth century. If we search for other sixteenth-century statuettes which are of comparable size and finish, two, with an Italian provenance, present themselves: the Bacchus and the Pomona (or Venus) in the Ca d'Oro in Venice (nos. 58 and 59). Not only is the size the same exactly the same in the case of the Venus or Pomona but this size is a most unusual one, so a coincidence is improbable. Furthermore the type of varnish and the distinctive wire-brush finish is identical. The style is very close: the treatment of facial features, details such as fingernails and hair on the Adam and the Venus or Pomona are the same. Furthermore the quality is the same: the Adam and the Venus or Pomona are among the most beautiful small bronzes to have survived from the sixteenth century. 
It has recently been demonstrated by Peter Meller (‘Un gruppo di bronzetti di Pierino da Vinci del 1547', Mitteilungen des Kunsthistorischen Instituts in Florenz, 18 (1974), 251-72) that the two bronzes in the Ca d'Oro were originally fixed to a handsome bronze base (no. 60) in the same collection decorated with the Stemma of the Martini family (to which Pierino's chief patron belonged) upon which is chiselled the date 'M.D.XL VII' (1547) and ‘OPERA · DI · PIERO DA VINCI.' It may seem hard to understand how a figure supposed to represent Adam can have any relation with these pagan figures, but the Pomona looks very much like an Eve, as Meller, with no knowledge of a possible partner in Oxford, astutely observed and he even speculated that Pierino might originally have thought of creating an Adam and Eve group (ibid. 259–62 and n. 19). When the Adam is seen, or rather imagined, beside the Ca d'Oro female nude the relationship has indeed far more interest, formally and as narrative, than that which exists in the pagan grouping. The Bacchus exists in only one other version (formerly in Berlin-see Meller, op. cit. 263) but the female bronze statuette exists in two other versions, one in the Louvre (Donation Thiers no. 87) and one formerly in the Benda Collection in Vienna (Bode, op. cit., ii, pl. CL, p. 20), and one of these could have originally been the Eve for the Ashmolean's Adam. The Louvre bronze retains exactly the same finely scratched surface and colour both of varnish and of natural patina as the Ashmolean's figure. That a sculptor in this period could have sanctioned the change of a work originally conceived as Eve into a Venus or Pomona (or vice versa) need not surprise us: Alessandro Vittoria in a will dated 7 November 1570 made special mention of 'La mia statua di bronzo' which could serve as a Sebastian or a Marsyas according to taste (G. Gerola, 'Nuovi documenti veneziani su Alessandro Vittoria', Atti del Real Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti, 84 (1924-5), 348). 
There is one other bronze statuette which might be related to this group by Pierino; it is a female nude in the reserve collection of the Art Institute of Chicago (1964-1159)-a figure of mysterious identity, described as a Lucretia and holding open a wound in her breast. This is very similar in 
character to the Ca d'Oro female although less well preserved in its surface. It is 7.4 cms. high, but this includes an integral base and if that is excluded the size is 17.1 cms.-nearly identical. It is also possible to imagine her serving as a companion for the Ashmolean Museum Adam. It should also be pointed out that the remarkable pair of polychrome wooden statuettes representing Epimetes and Pandora by El Greco (Prado, Madrid) must have been derived from the Ashmolean male nude and the Ca d'Oro female one, and were indeed once supposed to be of Adam and Eve (Conde de las Infantas, 'Dos esculturas del Greco', Archivio español de arte, 18 (1945), 193-200). 
The inscription on the bronze base in the Ca d'Oro should not be taken as proof that Pierino was responsible for the casting or even finishing of the bronze figures once attached to it. There are certainly cases of such names placed boldly on bronzes which are known to have been cast by independent craftsmen (Bandinelli, one of Pierino's masters, is a case in point). Vasari mentions that the children which Pierino modelled for the rim of the Hercules fountain by Tribolo at the Medici Villa at Castello had been cast by Zanobi Lastricati, and it would seem likely that he was dependent upon specialist founders and goldsmiths for the execution of subsequent work in this medium. The only other surviving bronze which has been convincingly attributed to him is the candlestick the form of a miniature tripod in the British Museum U. Middeldorf, 'Notes on Italian Bronzes', Burlington (agazine (Dec. 1938), 204–9) the finish of which is not very ose to that of the Ca d'Oro figures. 
Finally, it must be asked how the Adam fits into Pierino's vre. The answer has to be that one would never have essed that it was by him, any more than one would have essed that the female nude or the Bacchus in the Ca d'Oro e by him. Comparisons, for example between the hair of the Adam and that of the youths in the Ugolino relief (No. 72) or of the River God in the Louvre, can be made which reduce one's surprise, but one aspect of the figure remains unexpected the alert, nervous tension and arrested movement which depends upon the figure's unbent right leg. Pierino in his other works consistently avoided giving figures an erect posture and had indeed an unusual preference for sagging poses. 
Peter Meller, who accepts that the Adam must have been made as a companion with the Eve/Pomona, has proposed to me that it might be the work of the same, surely Netherlandish, artist who created the exquisite statuette of St John (presumably from a Crucifixion group) in the Bargello, Florence (Inv. 741). Also striking is the relationship with the battered and highly restored Adam by Stoldo Lorenzi in the Castello Sforzesco, Milan (038). 
 

@@75

Bartolomeo PINELLI (1781-1835) 
75. Man baiting a bull with mastiffs 
35 cms. (height, approximate because the base is sunk in the wooden plinth); 41 cms. (length of rough integral oval base); 45.8 cms. (length of wooden plinth); 38.1 cms. (width of wooden plinth) 
Terracotta of a pale cream to grey-pink colour. Numerous minor firing cracks but few chips missing. The end of the bull's right horn is missing. There is an old repair where the man's hand grips the forehead of the bull. The back legs of the bull have been broken and recently repaired. 'Pinelli fece 1827' is incised boldly and cursively on the rim of the rough integral oval base; the '2' is easily mistaken for an '0'. The group is mounted on a plinth of pale beech. Given by Mrs Harvey in 1910 from the collection of her husband the late H. A. Harvey of Christ Church. The recent repairs were carried out by Mr Saleh in the 1970s. 
Pinelli seems always to have modelled on a small scale in clay, picking up the art from his father, an impoverished maker of cheap devotional images; but his terracottas only attracted attention from the public, and perhaps only received serious attention from him, after his drawings and prints came into great demand in the years following the successful publication 1809 of his etchings of the picturesque costumes of the Campagna. His earliest dated terracotta is of 1812, and most 
of his surviving works are dated between 1828 and 1835. In 1834 he published etchings of some of them under the title 'Gruppi pittoreschi modellati in terra-cotta da Bartolomeo PINELLI ed incisi all'acquaforte da lui medesimo', consisting of a frontispiece and twenty plates. An additional eight plates were added to the series in 1835. The subjects tend to be carnival Piferrari, the Saltarello, Brigands, or simply Contadine with their children (see G. Incisa della Rocchetta, Bartolomeo Pinelli (Palazzo Braschi, Rome, 1956)—a catalogue of twenty-two signed sculptures all from Roman collections which also includes an edition of the biography of Pinelli by Oreste Raggi). The Ashmolean's group is typical of a heroic tendency in Pinelli's treatment of traditional popular activity which recalls some of the studies Géricault had made ten years previously in Rome. It makes Pinelli's relatively rare treatments of classical subject-matter easier to understand. (For this latter aspect of his art see the gilded terracottas of Jupiter and Juno dated 1815, published by A. González-Palacios (Il tempio del gusto (Roma e il regno delle Due Sicilie) (Milan, 1984), i. 179), and for Pinelli's neo- classicism generally see id., 'La grammatica neoclassica', in Antichità viva (Sept. 1973), and M. Fagiolo and M. Marini, Bartolomeo Pinelli 1781-1835 e il suo tempo (Rome, 1983), 102-6, for the watercolours and line drawings of 'Episodi della storia Greca' dated 1820-1, and 141 for his treatment of the Niobids.) 
 
Imitator of Angelo Gabriello PIÒ (1690–1770) 
76. Virgin and Child 
25.9 cms. (height); 20.8 cms. (width); 1.4 cms. (thickness of relict); 20.5 cms. (height of pedestal); 24.3 cms. (length of pedestal); 13.8 cms. (width of pedestal) 
Terracotta of a pale pink colour. Old colouring seems to have been removed upon acquisition, but traces of blue and white pigment remain in the hollows of the drapery. There are also traces of gilding around the edges of the ground, possibly from a frame. There is a crack passing through the entire relief to proper left of centre, most evident across the back of the Virgin's hand. There is another crack in the ground to proper right, also small losses from the edges of the drapery and numerous tiny cracks and scratches. There is an irregular edge cut back all around the relief for the rebate of a frame. This looks as if it has been cut out of the relief after firing. The relief was apparently mounted on a velvet-covered plinth and surround shortly before acquisition but this was probably replaced because the dark green velvet is one much used by the Museum. The pedestal of gilded wood with rather coarse foliate C-scrolls against a field of blue-grey colour is likely to have been supplied by the dealer. 
Bought with the aid of the Blakiston Fund from Messrs. P. & D. Colnaghi, Old Bond Street, London, in 1964. The purchase was discussed by the Keeper, Ian Robertson, in a letter to Roddy Thesiger of Colnaghi's on 27 February 1964. Robertson agreed to make the first half payment in April. He was keen that the relief should be included in the gallery's spring exhibition Paintings by Old Masters where it was no. 8 (illustrated as pl. VI in the catalogue). The relief was registered on 10 June. 
The relief was acquired with an attribution to Giuseppe Mazza and Robertson published it in the Annual Report as 'of about 1700, and perhaps executed during the artist's visit to Venice'. He added that 'it offers features of handling comparable with the initialled oval relief of the same subject formerly in the Kaiser Friedrich Museum, Berlin' (reproduced in A. E. Brinckmann, Barock-Bozzetti (Berlin, 1923), i. 150, pl. 66). There are similarities with the terracotta reliefs signed 'G.M.' which are attributed to Mazza, but there is no very close connection with the relief Robertson singled out, and his precision of dating was over-confident. There were other sculptors from Bologna working in terracotta in this style and on this scale among whom the sculptor who succeeded Mazza as the leading artist in terracotta and stucco there, Angelo Gabriello Piò (1690-1770), seems worthy of consideration in connection with this relief. (For Mazza see E. Riccòmini, Ordine e vaghezza: Scultura in Emilia nell'età barocca (Bologna, 1972), 90-115 and elsewhere, and for Piò, id., Vaghezza e furore: La scultura del settecento in Emila (Bologna, 1977), 50-69.) The curvaceous eyelids of the Virgin, her slightly pointed nose, the flat ends of her tapering fingers, and the very small mouth of the Christ Child are all idiosyncrasies to be observed in Piò, although in less marked form. The work does not, however, seem quite good enough to be by him. 
The highly attractive handling of the drapery, its softness of texture combining with the infantile and feminine flesh 
with which its continuous flutter contrasts, conceals only briefly the uncertain management of the planes-the flatness of the Virgin's right arm and the uncomfortably abrupt foreshortening of her left arm. Also unsatisfactory is the uncertain direction of the Virgin's gaze and the tight and truncated character of the composition, especially where her left arm is cut off and the drapery stops below the arms. However, if, as there is reason to suspect, the relief was cut down, then we would originally have understood whether she was sitting or standing, a St John or a donor would have made sense of her gaze, and the composition would appear less cramped. Most intimate devotional reliefs of this made in Bologna were oval. 
type 
Samples were taken by Mrs Doreen Stoneham of the Oxford Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art in April 1974 and a thermo-luminescence test indicated that the relief was fired between 1583 and 1788 (ref. 81-m- 63). Another sample taken in October 1986 indicated that it was fired between 1606 and 1736 (ref. 381-y-37). 
106 
 
Probably by Francesco Antonio Franzoni (1734-1818) and Lorenzo Cardelli (active 1770-1810) 
After designs by Giovanni Battista PIRANESI (1720-78) 
77 and 78. Pair of candelabra, one involving three cranes and a kneeling faun (77) and the other three elephant heads and an altar decorated with reliefs of deities (78), both supported by three lion's legs 
244.1 cms. (height of No. 77, excluding marble pedestal); 243.9 cms. (height of No. 78, excluding marble pedestal); 41 cms. (height of each marble pedestal); 44.5 cms. (diameter of the acanthus cup crowning each candelabrum); 68.5 cms. (height of the cranes in 77). 
White marble, of a variety of types, with much of the surface abraded. Each candelabrum is composed of numerous parts and iron has been used extensively in assembling them. In some areas the rusting cramps are evident on the surface, e.g. in the tail of the crane standing below the faun's tail in No. 77, in one corner of the altar stage in No. 78, and on the plinth between paws of the lions and the central support in No. 78. The question of which parts of the candelabra are ancient is discussed below. Piranesi was capable of breaking and rejoining the modern work to make it look ancient which complicates this discussion, but there has also been accidental damage (and perhaps vandalism) since the candelabra arrived in Oxford. The breaks in the legs of the cranes, for instance, are relatively recent, to judge by the modern adhesive all too evident on them. It is interesting that there were originally two struts between each pair of crane legs-struts left by the restorer to improve the sculpture's chances of surviving unbroken in transport. These should have been carefully cut away by a mason when the candelabra were erected in the Radcliffe Camera. One remains; the others have been knocked off, leaving little branches on the legs. The stage of No. 77 which consists of a relief of masks framed by eagles has been pitted all over perhaps as an attempt at 'distressing'. The upper surface of the plinth of No. 77 has been very coarsely tooled and what looks like a letter 'a' and certainly a letter 'b' have been crudely chiselled on it. The points of the beaks of all the cranes and the ends of the trunks of two of the three elephants have been broken off and lost. Both unmoulded marble pedestals are chiselled with the following text, blacked for emphasis: 'ACADEMIAE. OXONIENSI/HOC/ ROMANAE ELEGANTIAE EXEMPLA EX RUDERIBUS VILLAE / IMPERATORIS. HADRIANAE.TIBURTINAE / NUPER EFFOSSUM / ROGERUS.NEWDIGATE.BARONETTUS/GRATO.ANIMO / D.D.D. / 
A.D.MCCLXXVI' 
The candelbra were bought in Rome on 6 May 1775 by Sir Roger Newdigate from Piranesi for 1,000 Roman scudi, shipped to London through the agency of Thomas Jenkins, who also acted as Newdigate's banker, in the same year, and presented to the University in the following year, as declared by the Latin inscriptions. A bill for minor restoration, for transport, for the pedestals (in plain marble, unmoulded, following the line of the plinths), and for the inscription on the latter was submitted on 21 December 1776 by the London sculptor Richard Hayward. The candelabra were certainly installed in the Radcliffe library by February 1777. (See 
M. McCarthy, 'Sir Roger Newdigate and Piranesi', Burlington Magazine (July 1972), 466-72). The position of the candelabra within the Radcliffe Camera against the piers of the great reading room may be seen in R. Ackermann's History of Oxford, ii, (London, 1814), 238. In F. Mackenzie's drawing (engraved in 1836 for the 
Oxford Almanack) they are shown surrounded by casts of the Apollo Belvedere, the Diane chasseresse, the Stooping Discobolus, the Laocoön, and the Wrestlers. According to all recent published accounts the candelabra were transferred to the University Galleries in 1846, but Michaelis recorded them as still 'said to be' in the Radcliffe library where he did not have time to examine them (Ancient Marbles in Great Britain (Cambridge, 1882), 593-4) and they were in fact transferred in 1894 and were probably immediately set up in the Randolph Gallery where they were certainly to be seen in 1909 (Summary Guide, 17) and where they have remained since, although in different positions. Their position at the eastern end of the gallery was taken up in 1983. They were moved to the entrance of the Ruskin lecture hall in 1991. 
Having established himself by the early 1750s as the leading topographical printmaker in Rome, Piranesi moved into the field of archaeological illustration with this Trofei di Ottaviano Augusto of 1755 and the four volumes of the Antichità romane of 1756. Such work entailed a close study of the loose fragments of architectural ornament as well as the half-buried bones of buildings. His interest in such fragments must have increased during the mid-1760s when he was invited to employ and invent such ornaments himself, serving his fellow Venetian Pope Clement XIII (Rezzonico) as architect and designer of furniture and décor. And in the same years he became more interested in architectural theory, publishing in his Parere su l'architettura of 1765 a boldly polemical defence of the licence of Roman architectural practice, which was based on a thorough study of the originality and fantasy of ancient Roman ornamental sculpture. By 1767 Piranesi was certainly busy with the design (and in supervising the manufacture) of chimney-pieces in which fragments of ancient relief carving and even portions of ancient architraves were sometimes incorporated, so he must have begun to collect antiquities by then and had probably already begun to form 'a museum specially devoted to fragments of architecture and a collection of ornaments unique in its kind', as it was described by his biographer J. G. Legrand ('Notice historique sur la vie et les ouvrages de J. B. Piranesi' (1801), first reprinted in Nouvelles de l'estampe, 5 (1969), and subsequently fully edited by G. Erouart and M. Mosser in Piranèse et les Français (Rome, 1978), 213-52, see 241). By 1768 his activities in this field were exciting the satire of his rival and associate the dealer and banker Thomas Jenkins. Writing to the collector Charles Townley on 9 November Jenkins described the latest interest of Piranesi the 'cav of the candelabri'. (For this letter see G. Vaughan's Ph.D thesis "The Collecting of Classical Antiquities in the Eighteenth Century: A Study of Charles Townley (1737-1805) and his Circle' (Oxford, 1988), 42-3.) 
Jenkins mentions a couple of candelabra which it seems 
108 
 
Piranesi had hoped that Townley might buy, and also notes that Pirancsi has composed a monument for himself. His 'third Candelabra'-perhaps meaning this monument-'is compleatd, the which As he sais, was found tele quale as well as the other two in Adrians Villa'. Jenkins concludes by reporting that 'he declares he does not wish to sell any part of his collection' which, it is implied, would not fool Townley. Piranesi's chimney-pieces were for sale and according to this letter he had hoped to sell a pair of candelabra to Townley: 
over 
great 
the following decade, the last of Piranesi's life, he sold a 
deal from his museum. The etchings which he had made during those years and which were assembled in the two volumes of his Vasi, candelabri, cippi, sarcophaghi, tripodi, lucerne, ed ornamenti antichi in 1778, the year of his death, were designed to promote business as well as to assist learning, since they recorded sales and advertised work for sale. Nevertheless, it does seem to have been the case that Piranesi wished to keep much of his collection together and he enjoined his heirs to preserve it as a museum. His son Francesco in fact continued to sell choice items, to British and other foreign collectors and to the papal museum, before selling the bulk of the collection in 1792 to King Gustavus III of Sweden (O. Neverov, 'Giovanni Battista Piranesi, der Antikensammler', Xenia, 3 (1982), 71-90; C. Gasparri, 'La Galleria Piranesi da Giovan Battista a Francesco', Xenia, 3 (1982), 91-107. 
It is not hard to explain why Piranesi became so interested in candelabra. There were no antiquities in Rome more talked about in the latter 1760s than the exceptionally grand Hadrianic marble candelabra with their extraordinary undercut acanthus leaves acquired by Jenkins from the Barberini family in 1766 and sold by him to William Lock of Norbury in the following year but blocked for export by Winckelman in his capacity as Prefect of Antiquities. They were then acquired by the new Pope Clement XIV and were one of the pretexts for the creation at the end of the decade of his new museum in the Vatican. In 1770 also a great antique candelabrum was presented to the pope by Cardinal Zelanda (and an erudite paper published on it in the Giornale pisano by Gaetano Marini). In the following years Pope Clement secured the antique candelabra preserved in S. Costanza and S. Agnese for his museum. 
The earliest evidence of Piranesi designing his own candelabra is to be found in his Diverse maniere d'adornare i camini, published in 1769 but prepared over the previous years, in which there are high relief candelabra adorning the uprights of one chimney-piece, free-standing candelabra to either side of another one, and smaller, presumably ormolu, candelabra both on a chimney-piece and by themselves intended as candelsticks (see pls. 20, 29, 34, and 51). Perhaps even more significant, and probably earlier, are the candelabra which Piranesi envisaged flanking the high altar of S. Giovanni in Laterano in one of the drawings (now in the Cooper Hewett Museum, New York) for redecorating the chancel of that basilica which he made for the Rezzonico family between 1763 and 1765, a point first made by John Wilton Ely (The Mind and Art of Giovanni Battista Piranesi (London, 1978), 
113). So 
many 
of Piranesi's ideas may be traced back to sources 
in his native city that it is worth mentioning the bronze candlestands which were such an impressive feature of churches in Venice and the Veneto, especially since they were far more complex in design than any such to be seen in Rome and served, as it were, as anthologies of fantastic imagery. 
Piranesi was so keen on the candelabrum as a type sculptural architecture that he designed his own monument 
of in this form-something which no one had ever thought of before. It was erected for a while over his tomb in the church of the Certosa (S. Andrea delle Fratte) but in 1779 when his remains were moved to S. Maria del Priorato (the church of the Knights of Malta on the Aventine which Piranesi had rebuilt) the candelabrum was replaced by the portrait statue by Angelini and so re-entered the family collection. It was then sold to Cardinal Braschi from whom it was appropriated by the French and placed in the Louvre (Gasparri, op. cit. 106 n. 48). It may be to this memorial candelabrum that Jenkins refers in his letter to Townley, although it was not in fact composed out of fragments excavated at Hadrian's Villa but, according to Piranesi's own text on his print of it (in Vasi, candelabri, cippi...), out of pieces 'dimessi' in Palazzo Salviati at Longara. 
The candelabra in the Ashmolean Museum are, after that in the Louvre, the most splendid and imposing of those that Piranesi assembled. In the first of the two prints which he made of No. 77, he states explicitly that it was reconstructed from pieces discovered in the Pantanello Lake at Hadrian's Villa in 1769 when it was drained by Gavin Hamilton. The earliest of the two prints made of No. 78 states that it had the same origin, although the date is not given. Legrand's biography implies that these discoveries in the Pantanello were the initial stimulus to the creation of Piranesi's museum. However, as Dr Vaughan observes (in his thesis cited above, 96-8), Jenkins letter reveals that Piranesi not only had a considerable collection before 1769 but had also access to excavations at the Villa before then, which is significant in view of Hamilton's own observation that Piranesi had played a part in identifying the best location for his immensely fruitful excavation there (Vaughan, op. cit. 96-8). The etchings of Hadrian's Villa, surely the greatest of all Piranesi's prints, belong, significantly to the late 1760s, and he must have spent much time there. 
The size of Piranesi's 'museum' in Palazzo Tomati, Strada Felice, was commented upon by many. A letter to Townley from the architect Vincenzo Brenna of 10 February 1769 describes the numerous botteghe in the Strada Felice taken over by the sculptor and the thirty people employed by him to work the marble (Vaughan, op. cit. 98). This may be an exaggeration, for the first of the three carvers whom Legrand mentions as employed by Piranesi, Lorenzo Cardelli, is unlikely ever to have been a member of Piranesi's household factory. Cardelli had his own workshop-'entrando nella Strada Condotti', as it is listed on a memorandum of notable suppliers of antiquities compiled in 1769 or 1770 in connection with the foundation of the new Vatican museum by Clement XIV (S. Howard, 'An Antiquarian Handlist and the Beginnings of the Pio-Clementino', Eighteenth-Century Studies (autumn 
 
1973), 40-61). Moreover, Cordelli either had other artists working for him or at least retailed their work, for the mosaic on the chimney-piece which he sold to Thomas Mansel Talbot in 1771, and which is today at Penrice Castle, is signed by 'Aquatti' (J. Cornforth, 'Penrice Castle, Glamorgan', ii, Country Life (25 Sept. 1975), 757 and fig. 4). Of the two other sculptors mentioned by Legrand, 'Pronzoni' and 'Jacquictti', the first must be Franzoni, who certainly also worked independently, although it is possible that he began his carcer employed exclusively by Piranesi, and the second has not been identified for certain (I do not accept the ingenious suggestion of Erouart and Mosser that it is 'sans douter graphic fautive pour Francesco Righetti'). 
It has never seriously been suggested that Piranesi ever carved anything himself, but according to Legrand he made models for the broken parts whose restoration was tricky ('delicate'). There are a dozen or so drawings by him for candelabra and similar compositions, but they are very bold compositional studies (see especially the drawing in the British Museum for a candelabrum, no. 44 in A. Bettagno (ed.), Disegni di Giambattista Piranesi (Vicenza, 1978); and some of the drawings recently discovered in Bologna, pls. 116-24 in A. Cavicchi and S. Zamboni, 'Due "taccuini" inediti', in A. Bettagno (ed.), Piranesi tra Venezia e l'Europa (Florence, 1983)). Presumably more detailed drawings or models must have been made for the Ashmolean candelabra, although an element of inspired improvisation may well have played a part in their construction. 
In the texts on the plates which Piranesi made of the Ashmolean candelabra there is no indication of how extensive the modern additions are, nor any hint that the reconstruction of the parts was, to say the least, highly speculative. Of No. 77 Piranesi wrote in his first etching, dedicated to James Byres, that 'si rende pregievole per l'elegante Varietà, e l'idea dell'intagli con finezza di gusto scolpiti, e sue sculture con leggiadria distribuzione e grottesco disposte; di maniera che non ingombrano essi l'idea generale', which one would like to think was written tongue-in-cheek. The junction of the kneeling faun in No. 77 with the cup above in fact looks hastily designed. The contraction of the candelabrum below the cranes is painful, as is the way in which the noses of the dolphins collide with the next stage. The continuation of the acanthus shoot from the dolphin stage to the post behind the cranes works better on paper than in reality. In No. 78 the altar base of triangular plan which is so often incorporated in antique candelabra is placed higher up than any antique precedent or modern convention could have suggested and seems awkward. The arrangement of fluted and reeded elements below the crowning cup in No. 78 is also congested in a manner for which there are no ancient sources. The candelabra, even if consisting entirely of genuine antique fragments, could only have been composed by Piranesi and there can be little doubt that the congestion, awkwardness, and painful transitions were enjoyed by him. Some of his carliest imaginary reconstructions of the 'wild enormities of ancient magnanimity' published in his Opere varie of 1750 already include fantastic hybrid inventions, for instance in the 'Parte di ampio magnifico porto' a conical storiated column 
emerges from a tapering rostral column which emerges from an obelisk decorated with the S-fluting found on sarcophagi, as if parts of each antique had been reassembled by a witty 
barbarian. 
In the first ctching that he made of No. 78 which was dedicated to 'Cav. Carlo Morris' Piranesi expanded, not on the beauty of the composition, but on the meaning on the imagery: the figures in low relief on the three sides of the altar stage represent Hercules, Minerva, and Silvanus to whom 
the candelabrum was sacred, the base was decorated with 'teschi, e simboli allusivi alla Religione', and the sphinxes and elephant heads placed at the angles were guardians. The base with its sacrificial instruments and garlanded bucrania is surely modern work, although derived from a common form of Roman frieze. The reliefs of deities are all fragments inserted into a framework which must also be modern. Piranesi cannot have been sure that they originated in such a setting. It is hard to understand how the very worn figure called by him Silvanus can be identified with any confidence, and hard to accept that the other two reliefs came unaltered from the Pantanello. The 'Hercules' has a feminine build, a light step, a fluttering lion pelt, and carries his club so daintily that he looks like an invention by Perugino, and indeed this might well be a fragment of a Renaissance relief. The Minerva is more orthodox, but the way that the further side of her shield simply disappears suggests an interest in aerial and evanescent effects more typical of the fifteenth-century low relief than of Hadrianic sculpture. 
The parts of the candelabra which are probably ancient, even if patched up and sometimes worked over, are, on No. 77, the kneeling faun, the stage decorated with screwed dolphins with a scallop between them, the foliate lion's feet, and, most interestingly, the part of the base with expressive masks in low relief flanked by eagles. On No. 78 the three lion's legs with their pelts and heads on their knees and the stage decorated with squat sphinxes with vegetal tails come into this category. Particularly problematic are the cranes in No. 77 and the elephants in No. 78. A portion of the tail and feet of each crane is integral with the central foliate post and does look genuinely abraded. The heads and necks of each crane are certainly all new and their legs have all been restored, but the body of one bird (that below the tail of the kneeling faun) looks like ancient work only slightly recut. The most vividly carved of all the birds (that below the faun's right leg) is surely modern, although it is patched. One might suspect the antiquity of the elephant heads because they are such a peculiarity. Such heads had been employed, in 1756, surely without knowledge of the antique, by modellers at the Sèvres factory, for vase candlestands (of which there are fine examples in the Wallace Collection) and had been employed by Piranesi himself in his chimney-piece for Burghley House (above the rosso antico herms) and in a design for a clock (both published in Diverse maniere, pls. 1 and 61) before the alleged discovery of the antique fragments out of which his candelabra were composed. Nevertheless, the elephants in No. 78 look genuine and had they been invented by Piranesi he would surely have made the leaf ornament between them more interesting. 
112 
 
Having retrieved what is likely to be ancient, we can identify what is certainly modern. The identical cups crowning each candelabrum with their curling acanthus leaves and crisp waterleaves between them are neither worn nor reworked and cannot have spent centuries in the Pantanello. This is also truc of the altar section of No. 78 with its ram's heads and down-curling leaves above (but excepting the inserted reliefs). It is also true of the entire base of No. 78 above the lion's legs and below the sphinxes (all of one piece of marble with a diagonal grey streak) and true of the plinth of No. 77 below the eagles. Reviewing these modern portions we note that they have a consistency of handling which derives from a very ostentatious use of the drill-a small drill is used to create points of shadow in palmettes and honeysuckle and the serrated edges of acanthus, a larger one is used in the ram's heads and leaves and berries above the altar section in No. 78 to such an extent that when looked at closely the forms dissolve, as when photographic reproductions reveal themselves as mechanical dots. This use of the drill is a feature of many of Piranesi's restored antiquities and is also found in his chimney-pieces, for instance those at Burghley and Gorhambury, and it can be seen in some of the ornamental carving in the Museo Pio-Clementino-for instance, the frames of the reliefs set into the wall of the Sala degli Animali and the decorative borders of the verde antico tables with winged ram supporters now in the same room (originally in the Sala dei Busti). It is a type of carving inspired by what has often been regarded as a decadent tendency in ancient Roman sculpture. Such drilling is never found on ancient Greek ornamental work. Piranesi, as a defender of the originality of the ancient Romans, must have known this and perhaps encouraged this manner of handling for this reason. 
It remains to identify the sculptors who made the modern portions of the candelabra. As we have already pointed out, Legrand, whose biography was written with information provided by Piranesi's family, mentioned Cardelli. This sculptor was the restorer of the candelabrum now in the National Gallery, Stockholm, which came from Piranesi's museum. We know this from the catalogue made in 1792 by Giuseppe Angelini when it was bought by Gustavus II (P. Kjellberg, 'Piranesis antiksamlung i Nationalmuseum', Nationalmusei arsbok, 2 (1920), 156–69). That Cardelli was particularly associated with the restoration of candelabra might also be concluded from the fact that he is documented as working on the candelabra removed from S. Agnese and taken to the Vatican in 1772 (see the note by C. Pietrangeli appended to W. Amelung and G. Lippold, Die Skulpturen des Vaticanischen Museums, III, ii (Berlin, 1956), 544). The Swedish candelabrum has many passages of drillwork similar to those in the Ashmolean candelabra. One wonders whether it was this aspect of his work which Father Thorpe had in mind when on 6 February 1774 he wrote to his patron Lord Arundel from Rome about chimney-pieces that could be bought there, citing Cardelli in particular as someone who 'cuts ornaments in marble as fine as the ancients did' (quoted by W. Rieder in 'Piranesi at Gorhambury', Burlington Magazine (Sept. 1975), 590–1). 
The second sculptor mentioned by Legrand was Franzoni. 
His special talent was for the carving of animals and he is documented as the restorer of most of the small sculpture asssembled in the Sala degli Animali created by the papal architect Michelangelo Simonetti in the Museo Pio- Clementino, between the mid-1770s and the mid-1780s. Outstanding among these are the birds, similar in size and often in type to the cranes in No. 77, and indeed including a crane with spread wings (W. Amelung, Die Skulpturen des Vaticanischen Museums, (Berlin, 1908), 11, ii, no. 122, pl. 32, as 'Reiher?') which was noted by E. Q. Visconti as coming from Piranesi's collection (Il Museo Pio-Clementino, vii (Rome, 1807), 50-1, commentary on pl. XXVIII). Visconti considered that the carving of the plumage is hard to match in ancient or modern sculpture, but in fact it was matched by Franzoni. If, as seems likely, the Vatican crane had already been restored by Franzoni when it was acquired from Piranesi's collection (which was certainly also the case, incidentally, with the 'Capra con gru e serpe' which was also bought for the museum from Piranesi's collection-see Gasparri, op. cit. 94) then it might have been because of his work for Piranesi on Hadrianic animal fragments that Franzoni came to be employed for this same purpose by the pope. Franzoni was (I am informed by Professor Pietrangeli) responsible for the magnificent winged ram supports of the verde antico tables mentioned above which suggests that, like Cardelli, he too employed this style of decorative drillwork. 
Finally a note is required concerning Sir Roger Newdigate, the noted connoisseur and collector, also a talented amateur artist, who presented these remarkable objects to the University for which he was Member of Parliament between 1751 and 1780. He bought the Candelabra from Piranesi during his second Grand Tour which he made between July 1774 and December 1775, after the death of his first wife. Before buying them he had associated with Piranesi as a fellow antiquarian, showing him drawings of the Roman arch at Aosta which Piranesi promptly etched, and borrowing from him a plan of the Baths of Caracalla (McCarthy, op. cit.) It has generally been supposed that Newdigte bought the candelabra with Oxford in mind: possibly, however, he realized on returning home to his country seat of Arbury Hall in Warwickshire that he would find it hard to accommodate them and then thought of the University. Certainly Piranesi seems not to have realized that they were destined for the University and he did not mention this in the text on the second etching that he made of candelabrum No. 77 where he mentions that 'Sig. Cavaliere Rugiero Newdigate, gentiluomo di gusto' has transported it to his 'Patria'. 'Extant in Bibliotheca Radcliviana' was, however, later added in small letters. Newdigate had earlier played a part in negotiating the donation of the Arundel marbles to the University; indeed it was his letter which conveyed to the Meeting of Convocation on 20 February 1755 the offer of the dowager countess of Pomfret to present her 'Inestimable collection of Statues, Busts and other Antiquities' (R. F. Ovenell, The Ashmolean Museum, 1683–1894 (Oxford, 1986), 144). Fifty years after the gift, Newdigate, shocked at the inadequate accommodation of the marbles in the Logic School, offered to pay for their cleaning, restoration, and 
 
transfer to the Radcliffe library where his candelabra already stood he envisaged the statues placed against the piers and between the arches of the reading room while reliefs and inscriptions would be in the open space below which would be glazed and secured by iron bars (as it is today). His offer was accepted (after some attempts to deflect it) by the Radcliffe Trustees and then, on 24 March 1806, by Convocation, but the Radcliffe librarian Professor Hornsby refused to allow the marbles in and the decree of acceptance was rescinded in the following year (ibid. 184–5). 
 
Supplied by Francesco RIGHETTI (1738-1819) 79. Callipygian Venus 
34.6 cms. (height) 
Bronze with a dark brown patina, ruddy where worn, with a slight green tinge in some areas. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. The figure's right leg has been cast separately and attached with a clear line at mid- thigh (possibly a replacement for a leg damaged in the casting, such additions being unusual in Righetti's bronzes). The circular unmoulded base is integral. 'F RIGHETTI F ROMAE 1788' is chiselled behind the figure's left foot. 
. 
Purchased on 15 November 1960 for £65 from Alfred Spero, 'Art Expert', 4 Park Mansions Arcade, Knightsbridge, London SW1. Registered on 4 November. 
Righetti, who studied under the Roman silversmith and bronze founder Luigi Valadier, established himself as one of the leading suppliers of bronze sculpture in the city in the last two decades of the eighteenth century. The four-page printed catalogue of his products dated 1794, and in French, survives in the Tatham papers in the Victoria and Albert Museum (reproduced F. Haskell and N. Penny, Taste and the Antique (London and New Haven, Conn., 1981), 343). Like his rival Zoffoli (see Nos. 110-15) he specialized in bronze reproductions of the most famous antique sculptures, 'fidélément [sic] copiés... reduits à une juste proportion', but unlike Zoffoli it seems he also produced full-size casts. He also supplied ornaments for clocks, vases, and obelisks in bronze 'dorés à differentes coleurs [sic], imitant parfaitement [sic] les belles dorures de France.' That his business was still active in 1810 is proven by his bronze reduction of Canova's nude standing portrait of Napoleon in the Louvre (LP. 2715) which is chiselled 'Francesco Righetti et fils 1810'. Models for his copies after the antique were supplied by Roman sculptors such as Pacetti (it is notable that the copies of statues not in Rome such as the Medici Venus dated 1787, with Agnews, Bond Street, winter of 1985, are less accurate). We know from C. H. Tatham that Righetti was not himself personally involved in either modelling or casting but was an entrepreneur (see No. 15). Given the large bronzes that he sold, however, it is unlikely that he did not have a foundry, although it is not impossible that he put work out. In the list of 1794 the statuette of the 'Venus Callipige de la Farnesine' was priced at 18 zecchini (nearly £9). Full size it could be supplied for 550 zecchini (£225). For the history and reputation of the Callipygian Venus see Haskell and Penny (op. cit. 316-18). 
K. T. Parker, then Keeper of the Department, whose decision to acquire this bronze must have been stimulated by his purchase of the version of the same antique prototype attributed by him to Hans Mont (No. 351), described it in the Annual Report for 1961 as follows: 'Closely based on the marble in its present condition, and obviously executed after the restoration by Albacini in the Eighteenth Century... It is by Francesco Righetti... dated 1788, thus clearly proving the minor but not uninteresting point that Albacini's restoration must have been fully carried out prior to that 
year.' But the bronze does not in fact correspond to the marble statue in its present condition in the Museum in Naples (to which it was taken not long before 1792-see Haskell and Penny, op. cit. 316-18). Superficially it may seem to reproduce Albacini's restorations, as Parker proposed, but only because Albacini's restorations were not very different from those they replaced. Two changes that Albacini did make may be mentioned: he altered the figure's hair dressing so that the locks tumbled down the neck to meet the top of the smock at the figure's left shoulder and he altered the end of the drapery which extends from the raised hand making it longer and more vertical. The Ashmolean Museum's bronze follows neither of these alterations, but follows the restorations which preceded them and which can be seen in the early engravings of the sculpture. In some small details the bronze departs from the prototype entirely: for instance it omits the central knot in the girdle below the breasts which is found in the statue today and is included in prints of the statue before Albacini restored it. This detail is included in the small bronze by Zoffoli (lot 92, Sotheby's, New York, 20 May 1988), which also has a bracelet on the figure's right wrist and a smaller base. 
 
Supplied by Francesco RIGHETTI (1738-1819) 
80 and 81. Busts of Bacchus and Ariadne 
29 cms. (height including socles) 
Bronze with a dark green and brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax, casts. Little evidence of any tooling. Both busts are attached by integral metal fixtures to turned socles of rosso antico. The bust of Bacchus (No. 80) has a slightly chipped socle and a dent on his chin. 'F. RIGHETTI. F. ROME. 1789' is chiselled in the metal across the narrow edge of back below the neck, in both cases, with triangular shaped stops, in the case of Bacchus with a long tail to the last numeral. 'B. / 404./F.' and 'B. / 405. /.' are painted in white in the hollow interiors. 
Given by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1889. B. 404 and B. 405 in his catalogues. Bought in Rome in 1848 for £5 according to the notebook catalogue, but in 1849 according to the earlier preliminary catalogue (p. 40). The bronzes have served as ornaments for coin cabinets in the Heberden Coin Room since 1959. 
Fortnum was aware that these were reproductions of antique sculptures and in his large manuscript catalogue he suggested that both were after prototypes in the Capitoline Museum in Rome. The Ariadne (81) is indeed a reduced copy of a sculpture in that museum, a work much favoured by Winckelmann who published it in his Monumenti inediti of 1767 (no. 55), and which is now considered to be an effeminate Dionysus (see H. Stuart Jones, The Sculptures of the Museo Capitolino (Oxford, 1912), 344-5). It is an exact copy save that the edge of the bust comes closer to the curls and the leaves in the hair are worn in the antique marble. This bust was much reproduced in marble, sometimes with a copy of the Capitoline Antinous as a companion (see for instance 
the pair sold at Sotheby's, London, 7 July 1988, lots 285 
and 286). 
The Bacchus was described when exhibited in Fortnum's lifetime as 'apparently a reduced model of the Braschi 
Antinous', but this is incorrect. It is in fact based on a marble in the Townley Collection in the British Museum (no. 1899, as an Antinous-Dionysus). Townley acquired this from the Villa Pamphili and casts, upon which Righetti's model would no doubt have been based, were made before it was exported (C. W. Clairmont, Die Bildnisse des Antinous (Rome, 1966) 51, no. 37, pl. 27). There is a difference in the inclination of the head and in the pattern of leaves and grapes. 
For Righetti see No. 79. These two bronzes are likely to correspond with the busts of Ariadne and Bacchus in Righetti's 1794 catalogue-a bust of 'Lisimaque' comes between them so they were not perhaps always sold as a pair-if so then they cost 12 zecchini each at that date. Tha was approximately £5-the sum for which Fortnum bought these examples half a century later. Small pairs of these two busts are also found-in bronze with ormolu socles (with Vinci Antiques, 124 New Bond Street, London, in 1986) an in ivory on ebonized socles (Christie's, London. 28 January 1988, lot 65). The bust of Ariadne is also found oddly incorporated in the tripod support for a pietra dura guérido table probably of the Second Empire (lot 387, Sotheby's, London, 17 March 1989, while that of Bacchus serves as the gilt bronze support for a tazza signed 'Beaujault 1871' (lot 176, Sotheby's, London, 28 September 1989). Clearly Righetti's models entered the stock of the Parisian bronzist Inferior sand-cast copies of the pair on miniature marble pedestals each stamped 'GS [MJEDAILLE D'OR 1867' were lo 53, Christie's, 23 March 1989. 
8. 401 
 
Perhaps by Niccolò (Nicolino) ROCCATAGLIATA (active 1593-1636) 
82. Infant angel, or amorino weeping 
27.7 cms. (height including bronze base); 0.5 cms. (maximum height of base); 10.5 cms. (height of marble pedestal) 
Bronze covered with a dark brown to black varnish, red where thinnest, worn to expose a dull greyish green-brown natural patina chiefly on the belly and thighs. Flaw on top of boy's left thigh. Dent also in thigh. Little evidence of tooling-the detail of the feathers, for instance, is all in the wax model. The small round bronze base is integral. The bronze is mounted (loosely) on a dark green breccia marble pedestal lettered in gold with the name of the donor and her brother. 
Given by Miss Elinor Rokeby Price in May 1948 (registered 21 May 1948), in memory of her brother Brigadier General Bartholomew G. Price, CB, CMG, DSO. Said to be from the collection of Jacob Goldschmidt. 
Another version of this bronze is in the Staatliche Museen, Berlin-Dahlem (no. 1814, see W. Bode, The Italian Bronze Statuettes of the Renaissance (London, 1912), iii, pl. CCLXV, and Ex aere solido: Bronzen von der Antike bis zur Gegenwart (Berlin, 1983), no. 74 (entry by Ursula Schlegel)). It differs a little in the mouth (the teeth may be detected only in that version), the drapery, the pattern of curls, and the degree to which the boy's toes overlap the base which in that case is also supported by a sub-base of egg and dart moulding (which is, however, separately cast). The size of the figures and the character of the bases suggests that they originally served as andiron ornaments. Such a weeping putto might have had a laughing putto as a companion-the merry child, 33.5 cms. high, from the Soulages Collection in the reserve collection of the Victoria and Albert Museum (8432-1863) perhaps reflects such a figure. A weeping putto of very similar character but smaller (19 cms. in height) and with thicker legs, and the hands in a different position (the back of his left hand flat against his left eye) which is in the collection of Sir Brinsley Ford (and was in the collection of Sir Thomas Lawrence) has as its pair a cheerful putto turning with his arms raised to his right. Fine examples of andirons with winged putti of similar character on top of them (but considerably larger in size) are in the Nelson Atkins Museum, Kansas City (62-19/1 and 2). Putti of this type, with elongated, undulating contours and loosely articulated forms-plump thighs, full bellies, the upper chest distinguished from the torso below by a high belt of drapery and with ovoid heads crowned with thick top curls, the open lips rendered as smooth projections, unjoined, not dissimilar to the chin, and the eyes, also summary in treatment, given segmental brows, have been particularly associated with Roccatagliata. They are in fact characteristic of Venetian sculpture generally in the second half of the sixteenth and in the early seventeenth century, and will be found in works documented as by other sculptors (the Annunciation, commissioned from Alessandro Vittoria by Hans Fugger in 1580, today in the Art Institute of Chicago- 
120 
 
1942.249-is a striking example) and in numerous bronzes which are of inferior quality (see Nos. 124, 125, 175, 176). But it is true that Roccatagliata seems to have been particularly fond of the type. Examples are the Christ Child held by the standing Virgin inscribed with the name 'NICOLLIN', in the Musée National de la Renaissance, Ecouen (CL. 13272); the large putti half-kneeling on the lower scrolls of the candelabra of S. Giorgio Maggiore, Venice (documented as made by him in collaboration with Cesare Groppo in the 1590s); the 'ventidue puttini di bronzo che si convertono in scartozzi con campanello attaccato a una mano e candelabro sopra la testa' commissioned for the same church, which may be identified as the light-fittings in the form of angel terms surviving beside all the side altars, one of which retains its bell attachments, in that church; and, above all, the altar front crowded with child angels and cherubim which since 1779 has served as the retable of the sacristry of S. Moisè, Venice—a work signed by him in 1633 and made with his son Sebastiano. It is noteworthy also that Roccatagliata's adults are also influenced by this infantile idea: this is true of the faces of his finest surviving works—the statues of Sts George and Stephen commissioned early in 1593 for the 'Scabelli delle prime sedie' of the new choir stalls and today on the altar rails of S. Giorgio Maggiore, Venice. 
It is also characteristic of Roccatagliata's work that the detail is not tooled but reproduced from the wax model. This is true, for example, of the scribbled pattern in the fringe of the Virgin's veil at Écouen, and of the decorations of St Stephen's chasuble. It is true too of the wings in this weeping 
An idiosyncratic feature of the putto is the treatment putto. of the second toes which are flattened, square ended, and with the nail very deeply set. This will also be found in the feet of the Virgin at Écouen, in the visible foot of the St George and in those of the exquisite terracotta Madonna and Child with Angels in Berlin (Staatliche Museen, Berlin- Dahlem, no. 2616). 
In all the literature on Roccatagliata it is assumed that he was responsible for the casting of his bronzes, but most of his recorded commissions were collaborative and he may have only provided the models- it is odd, if he was an experienced bronze founder, that the S. Moisè relief should have been cast by Jean Chenet and Martin Feron. His excellence as a modeller is suggested by the tradition that he was employed in this capacity by Tintoretto (recorded by R. Soprani in his Vite de' pittori, scultori, ed architetti genovesi, ed. C. G. Ratti (Genoa, 1768-9), i. 353-5). 
Volker Krahn informs me that the version of this bronze in Berlin was reproduced by Berlin foundries in the first 
decade of this century. 
Raffaello ROMANELLI (1856-1928) 
83. Bessie Rosalie France 
70.5 cms. (height of bust, from lowest portion of shawl to top of head); 63.2 cms. (height of bust, from back of bust where supported); 59.4 cms. (width of bust); 125.9 cms. (height of pedestal) 
Carrara marble. The plinth is of three separate units: plinth; shaft with base; capital, abacus, and block. There is gold in the recesses of the relief of a vase, ivy leaves, and berries on the block, in the hollows of the capital, in the channels on the shaft, and in the lettering: 'Boss & Mac' is chiselled in untidy cursive lettering on the front and back faces of the base of the shaft. 'BESSIE / ROSALIE / FRANCE' is chiselled in the tablet in the capital on its front side. 'Prof. R. Romanelli of Florence' is chiselled lightly in cursive letters obliquely to proper right in the fringe of the shawl. The bust was cleaned by Rachel Kenward in August 1988, and the pedestal cleaned by Mark Norman in April 1989. 
The provenance is unrecorded but is presumably connected with the France bequest. Remembered by Mr Taylor as being in the Museum when he commenced work here in 1948. Kept in the Museum's basement until March 1989 when placed in the Combe Room. 
Raffaello Romanelli was the son of Pasquale Romanelli (1812- 87) a pupil and chief assistant of Lorenzo Bartolini. Pasquale, like Bartolini, was noted for his attempts to produce marble, three-dimensional versions of famous paintings. His versions of Raphael's Madonna del Cardellino and of Allori's Sleeping Christ were famous. A good idea of his reputation with British and American visitors to Florence may be obtained from Mrs Trollope's 'Notes on the Most Recent Productions of the Florentine Sculptors', Part IV, Art Journal (1 Sept. 1865), 263-4, which describes a visit to his studio (formerly Bartolini's) near Porta S. Frediano. He produced candelabra and an elaborate chimney-piece for Lord Portarlington which were especially admired. Raffaello was no less successful. Among his most notable works in Florence are the splendid bronze statue of Ubaldino Peruzzi in Piazza Independenza, the bust of Cellini on the Ponte Vecchio, some of the sculptures on the façade of the Duomo, and the tomb of Donatello in S. Lorenzo. Also by him are the tomb of Pope Alexander II in St Peter's, Rome, and the statues of Garibaldi in Siena and of Charles Albert of Savoy on the Quirinal in Rome. But like his father he depended for much of his business on foreign visitors to Florence. His son, Romano, was also a successful sculptor. 
The variety of texture in this bust is characteristic of Raffaello Romanelli's work in marble. The rose petals and leaves in Mrs France's bosom are represented in thin and transparent marble, but impression is as much the sculptor's concern as imitation and it is not clear where the rose ends. The shawl appears to have first been carefully rendered in a low relief imitation of a textile pattern and then covered with rough blows of a chisel to give a vibrant effect. The hair is rendered by tremulously undulating chiselled channels. No less remarkable is the evanescent half-smile and the half- distant expression in the eyes. A still more exceptional example 
121 
 
of Romanelli's virtuosity in carving and imaginative portraiture is his ideal bust portrait Iris Fiorentina in the Museo Nazionale d'Arte Moderna, Rome. This is also terminated in an unorthodox manner: the shawl overhangs the pedestal over which flowers and ribbons also drip. 
The bizarre character of the pedestal of the bust of Mrs France is unlike anything found in British or French sculpture in the late nineteenth century but is typical of Italian work in this period, reflecting the innovations of Giuseppe Grandi, in particular in his marble portrait of Avvocato Billia commissioned in 1873 for the Municipal Cemetery in Milan (replaced by a bronze, the marble is now in the Galleria d'Arte Moderna, Milan, no. 1118-pl. 1114 in L. Caramel and C. Pirovano's catalogue Opere dell'ottocento (Milan 1975)). Grandi also did much to popularize the revival of early medieval, Lombardic, geometric decoration such as is employed here. It was very popular in Italian sculpture around 1880 often in combination with modern, art-nouveau, ornament—an extreme example of its use is the bronze statue Rinascita by Ettore Ximenes of 1897 in the Museo Nazionale d'Arte Moderna, Rome. 
Bessie Rosalie France was the wife of George Flood France, for whom see No. 84. It may be assumed that 'Boss' and 'Mac', the dachshunds represented 'adorsed' in relief on either side of the plinth of the pedestal, were her pets. 
 
Foundry of G. Vignali 
After Raffaello ROMANELLI (1856-1928) 
84. George Flood France 
63.8 cms. (height including integral bronze base); 1.3 cms. (height of integral bronze base); 4.2 cms. (height of marble plinth); 19.6 cms. (length of marble plinth); 16.4 cms. (width of marble plinth) 
Bronze of uniform dark brown patina. Hollow cast. Stamped into the model on back side of the integral bronze base 'FONDERIE. G. VIGNALI. E Co' with 'PARIS' continuing on the proper right side of the same base, the capitals irregular. Incised in the model across the proper left corner of the upper surface of the base 'Prc [: Prof. ?] Romanelli R./Florence. 1903.' in cursive letters. Chiselled in the metal on the front side of the base below the sculptor's name 'George F. France', a simulated signature with a tail to the 'e' and flourishes to the 'Gs' and 'Fs'. Mounted on ruddy brown Tuscan marble (marmo rossastro). 
Provenance unrecorded, but presumably connected with the France bequest. Remembered by Mr Taylor as being in the Museum when he commenced work here in 1948. 
G. F. France (MA Exeter College) who died on 14 February 1933 bequeathed seven-tenths of his estate to the University of Oxford subject to the payment of a life annuity of £2,000. Three-tenths of his bequest was to be devoted to the Ashmolean Museum. This bequest was accepted by decree of 7 November 1933. The recipient of the annuity died on 19 January 1947 and this bronze statuette together with the marble portrait bust of Mrs France (No. 83) may be supposed to have come to the Museum in that year-one in which the proper recording of accessions was, understandably, disrupted. Statuettes of this size and medium and informal character were not unknown in England-J. E. Boehm had indeed created something of a vogue for portraits of this sort, his Thackeray with pince-nez and both hands in pockets and his Millais with one hand in pocket and the other with a cigarette (both plasters of which are in the National Portrait Gallery) belong to the early 1860s--but by the end of the century this had ceased to be a popular type of portraiture in Britain. In Italy on the other hand such statuettes were much in demand. A number of examples from this period are preserved in the Museo d'Arte Moderna in the Palazzo Pitti in Florence, among them two striking examples by Raffaello Romanelli, one of the Avvocato Alfredo Ambrosiano of 1892 which represents him cross-legged holding a bowler hat and a cigar (Giorn. 741), and another of an unknown man with his hands in his pockets (CG. 647; Dep. Com. 240). The later was cast by the Vignali foundry, whose name appears on many Florentine bronzes of this period-the bronze statuette of George France is the only one I have seen in which the foundry is located in Paris rather than Florence and it must be concluded that it moved there, perhaps only briefly. Once cast, the bronze was perhaps sent back to Florence because the marble of the plinth is of a local type much favoured in Tuscany. Romanelli exhibited statuettes in the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition in 1909, one of which, of an 
English sitter, Mr Bushnell (no. 1681), 
was specified as of 
bronze. An Englishman, A. Bartlett, also wrote a book about Romanelli-Raffaello Romanelli and his works (Rome, 1915), which is unobtainable, however, in England and not easy to locate in Italy. For Romanelli see also No. 83. As mentioned there one of his most notable public statues was that of Ubaldino Peruzzi in Piazza Independenza in Florence dated 1897-the high reliefs of its pedestal include many figures very similar in size and character to this statuette. 
Little is known of France. He was the first son of the Revd George France and was born at Brockdish, Norfolk, in 1847. He was educated at Eton and matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford (also his father's college), in May 1864, taking his BA in 1867 and his MA in 1871. He was called to the Bar on 26 January of the latter year and by 1902 he had ceased practising. He was a JP for Middlesex and also FSA. (Information from Mr Maddicott of Exeter College and Mr Breem of the Inner Temple Library). 
124 
 
Unknown foundry 
After Jacopo SANSOVINO (Jacopo Tatti) (1486-1570) 85. Virgin and Child 
48.5 cms. (height, including base); 13.7 cms. (length of bronze plinth); 9.8 cms. (width of bronze plinth) 
Bronze with a dark brown, in parts slightly green, patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast, with varied, but mostly thick, walls, with some perforations in the folds behind the Virgin's right arm. There is much evidence of work with files and chisels. There is a firing crack at the back of the veil. An irregular large plug is visible in the drapery on the shoulder to proper right. Circular plugs are visible in undraped corners of the plinth proper front right and back left. There is a small knob on the head of Christ with a screw hole behind it and a plugged hole behind that; also a small hole in the top of the Virgin's head and nearby much evidence of filing, over a patch perhaps of a different metal. The integral bronze base is screwed to a spreading hollowed ebonized plinth and a sub-plinth, also of wood and painted to simulate verde antico marble. Bequeathed by Mrs Leverton Harris, 1939. 
A version of this statuette, with Sansovino's name (JACOBUS SANSOV.) chiselled across the front of the plinth, was published in 1922 (E. de Liphart, 'Deux maquettes en bronze de la Renaissance italienne', Gazette des beaux-arts, 64/2 (1922), 339-47) when it was, or at least had recently been, in the possession of a private collector in Leningrad. This found its way in the 1930s into the collection of Baron Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemissza and then, through Adolph Loewi in 1951, to the Cleveland Museum of Art (51.316). A certificate signed by Planiscig in January 1935 asserted that the lettering corresponds 'fully' to that on the plinths of the bronze statuettes of Sansovino's Evangelists in St Mark's in Venice. The similarity is hardly surprising and proves little, and in any case is not exact, since the Christian name commences here with a 'J' rather than an 'I' (not apparent at first since the tail is not firmly attached to the body of the letter), which is the case with no other version of the sculptor's name chiselled on either bronze or marble. Furthermore, it is curious, if the lettering is contemporary with the casting, that there is a disfiguring patch in the plinth between the first and second names. One would suppose that this was originally a neat enough repair for the letters to continue over it. However, the lettering certainly looks old and must at least reflect a tradition concerning the origin of the model. The elongated proportions and continuous curve from the Virgin's right foot to the fold of drapery above her head recall the sweep of Jacopo Sansovino's St James in the Duomo in Florence, while the conception of the Madonna as a mantelled Roman matron recalls both the seated Virgin and Child he made for S. Agostino in Rome and the works of his master Andrea Sansovino. 
More decisively, as Liphart observed when first publishing the bronze (ibid.), the bronze is only a little varied from the marble Virgin and Child above the tomb of Gelasio Nichesola in the Duomo of Verona which it is now known that Sansovino executed between 1530 and 1532. Since it is smaller 
in size (the marble version is 80 cms. high) the bronze was supposed by Liphart to be based on a maquette; this may be correct but the more upright pose which is the chief difference might also be explained as a modification to enable it to make more sense as an independent group (on the tomb the figures are designed to comfort the bishop who reclines in effigy below them) a point made by Bruce Boucher in his forthcoming monograph on Sansovino's sculpture. Like Liphart, Boucher discerns a debt to Donatello, and, noting that in the Cleveland statuette the irises of the Virgin's eyes have been perforated, he wonders whether the face was originally silvered, as with Donatello's Virgin and Child in the Santo in Padua. The finish of the Cleveland bronze resembles those known to have been cast after his models in Venice, and in particular the Evangelists of St Mark's which are of comparable size, and, where the darkened varnish has worn off, the metal is of the same chocolate colour, typical of a very coppery alloy, as is seen in the Evangelists. On the whole it seems likely that the bronze in Cleveland was made by, or for, Sansovino himself, and if so it may well be his first experiment with this medium (as Boucher also observes) made soon after his first contact with the thriving foundries and advanced casting technology of the Veneto. 
When Hans Weihrauch published his Studien zum bildernischen Werke des Jacopo Sansovino (Strasburg, 1935), 34 he was able to point out the existence of other bronze versions, unsigned, in the Goldschmidt Collection in Berlin and in the Gualino Collection (Galleria Sabauda, Turin). Another is in the Museo Poldi-Pezzoli, Milan (Piccolo Museo Mario e Fosca Crespi FC. 15/68), one is in the private collection of Professor Keutner in Florence, and one was sold at Sotheby's, London, 2 July 1973, lot 70, perhaps identical to one sold there 13 December 1990, lot 128. These versions, together with the Ashmolean's have been classed as replicas of a later period by W. D. Wixom (Renaissance Bronzes from Ohio Collections (Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio, 1975), no. 112) and, by implication, by Boucher (op. cit.). When compared with the Cleveland bronze the Ashmolean version is slightly larger (the base is 13.7 cms. long as against 13.5, 9.8 cms. wide as against 9.5, the distance from disc fastening to disc fastening is 7.6 cms. as against 7.4) so it is not a modified aftercast. In the Ashmolean versions the Virgin's fingers are more pointed and delicate, the suspended hand of Christ is less curled, the knot of drapery under the Virgin's wrist is less rounded, the hair curling down beside the disc fastenings is slightly thicker, the divisions of the virgin's hair are less parallel, the surfaces generally are smoother. The Cleveland version is at every point closer to the Verona marble and more typical of Sansovino, but the modifications do not suggest a mechanical copyist. Furthermore it is wrong to group all the later versions together. That in Milan has a round base, a rough finish, less definition in the Virgin's hair, and far tighter curls on Christ's head. That in Turin, to judge from photographs, is imprecise in all its details and may be an aftercast. That in the collection 
125 
t 
 
of Professor Keutner resembles the Ashmolean version in details such as the delicate hand of the Virgin, but is rougher in finish, with numerous flaws, pitted surfaces, and evidence of chiselling. It also has textured surfaces, the Virgin's mantle being heavily punched and chiselled with trefoil flowers. That sold at Sotheby's in 1990 seemed very close to the Ashmolean version. 
The holes in the backs of the heads in the Ashmolean group suggest that haloes were once fitted to them: these may have been replacements for earlier haloes to judge from the integral bronze projection on the top of Christ's head and the filing marks on top of the Virgin's. 
 
School of Jacopo SANSOVINO (1486-1570) 
86. St Jerome in penitence 
26.8 cms. (height including integral plinth); 2.1 cms. (height of integral plinth); 35.7 cms. (length of integral plinth); 14.7 cms. (width of integral plinth) 
Stone of an exceptionally fine grain with a pale, beige colour, polished in some smooth salient features such as the knee and forehead. Said to be Istrian stone but perhaps a limestone from the northern Veneto or from Brescia. There are chips missing from the edges of the 
plinth especially along the front lower edge, and at both back corners. The saint's left wrist is broken and has been refixed with some plaster infill. This was rebroken as a result of careless handling in 1987 and was refixed by David Armitage of the Department of Antiquities, old distorting plaster infill being removed at the same time. There are scratches to the surface in some areas which suggest cleaning and vestiges of paint may be discerned in some folds of drapery. Portions of an inscription painted in black letters on the back face of the plinth may be made out: the word 'Eglise' seems to be part of it, and, earlier in the line, a word including the letters 'racc.'. 
Bought in 1962 from the Arcade Gallery (Paul Wengraf) of The Royal Arcade, 28 Old Bond Street, London W1, with the France Fund, and with a grant from the Regional Fund administered by the Victoria and Albert Museum. Registered on 8 March. The sculpture seems always to have been displayed in the Fortnum Gallery on top of a cassone. 
Ian Robertson, publishing this unusual small stone carving (the size and colour of a terracotta modello) in the Annual Report (1962: 63-4), felt that an 'attribution to Jacopo Sansovino may be put forward with some confidence. The 
piece plainly shows the high-mannerist character of Sansovino's latest work, and valid comparison may be made with the figures recumbent in the framework of the bronze door of the Sacristy of St Mark's (the model for which seems to have been completed in 1546). The latter comparison is valuable. The torsion of the head and the treatment of the long beard blown against the upper chest also bring to mind Sansovino's bronze statuette of S Matthew on the altar rail of the Basilica of St Mark's (installed 1553) and his colossal marble Neptune (1554-67) on the Scala dei Giganti in the courtyard of the Doge's Palace. Such comparisons, howevr, only enable us to associate the figure with Sansovino's large school. The elongation of the saint's body and the treatment of the anatomy as a sequence of rounded lumps, loosely if dynamically related, suggest some of the tendencies in the work of his followers which may also be observed in figures invented by Tintoretto-particularly pertinent in this connection are the river gods in the spandrels of the library of San Marco delegated by Sansovino in the mid-1550s to Vittoria, Cattaneo, Ammanati, and Tommaso Lombardo. 
The existence of independent statuettes of St Jerome can be connected with the taste for small paintings of him, a taste which seems to have been particularly strong in the Veneto by the last quarter of the fifteenth cetury. The Ashmolean also possesses a terrracotta figure 38.5 cms. high, of the kneeling saint with his lion which was purchased from the Arcade Gallery (registered 12 November 1960), which looks as if it dates from the early sixteenth century. 
 
SBORDONI (mid-nineteenth century) 
87. Lion 
33 cms. (height); 37.2 cms. (length from front to back paws); 40.6 cms. (length of marble slab); 18 cms. (width of marble slab); 47 cms. (length of wooden plinth); 23.8 cms. (width of wooden plinth) 
Bronze with a pale green to yellow tan patina. Hollow, probably lost-wax, cast. Precisely tooled and highly polished. There are a few small perforations in the area of the mane. Fixed to a slab of Siena (yellow, flecked with grey) marble, on a rectangular, moulded plinth of cbonized wood. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. B. 444 in his catalogues. Fortnum records that the bronze was commissioned by him in 1853. Long displayed on top of a cabinet on the staircase outside the Print Room. Placed in the Fortnum Gallery in 1987. 
Fortnum had this lion made (as a companion for the bronze Bull (No. 162). A lion must seem an odd companion given the relative natural size of these animals. The explanation lies in the Sala degli Animali of the Museo Pio-Clementino where, as Fortnum knew, the antique marble prototype of his Bull had as its companion (on the other side of a stag carved out of flowered alabaster) a standing lion after which this lion was cast. The Vatican Lion is fashioned out of a yellow oriental breccia, of a colour close to that of a lion's coat, fitted with a tongue of rosso antico and with teeth and claws of white marble, and is mounted on a plinth of green porphyry. This 'lioncino', ancient, but extensively restored by Franzoni (see Nos. 77 and 78), was regarded as one of the most remarkable of the items in this now unfashionable corner of the Vatican Museums. (For an idea of the esteem with which it was regarded see E. Q. Visconti, Opere (Milan 1818-37), vii. 52, pl. XXIX). 
The Lion was first described on 30 June of 1780 ('un piccolo leone di pietra colombina, che tende al vermiglio lungo palmi due ...), and was included in a list of works recently acquired from the Mendicant Fathers (who owned the Basilica of Maxentius where it was excavated), compiled on 14 September 1780, as item 8: 'leone scolpito di certa breccia gialla simile al color naturale' valued at the high sum of 300 scudi (see C. Pietrangeli, Scavi e scoperte di antichità sotto il pontificato di Pio VI (Rome, 1958), 32, 41). Fortnum recorded that the foundry which cast his lion was that of Sbordoni in Rome. The Sbordoni family are still engaged in metalwork there (the showrooms of Gino Sbordoni and Edoardo Litardi are at 133 Circumvallazione Clodio). 
Unfortunately Fortnum is not explicit as to whether moulds 
were made of the antique on his initiative or that of the founder. One suspects it was Fortnum's idea (no other bronze version of the Bull is accompanied by a bronze version of the Lion), but once the founder had the moulds he seems to have 
made at least one other cast. 
Another version of the bronze Lion is illustrated in Bode's Italian Renaissance Bronzes (1908), iii, pl. CCXLVII, as in Dr Simon's collection in Berlin. Bode considered this as Italian of the first half of the sixteenth century and it was sold on 10-11 October 1929, lot 47 of the Berlin sale of Simon's collection, as a Florentine bronze of this period. J. Draper in his edition of Bode, suggesting that it might in fact be an Italian seventeenth-century cast, noted that the bronze is now unlocated. It is in fact in the National Gallery, Washington (Samuel H. Kress Collection 1957.14.7), at present displayed as of the late eighteenth century (presumably because it has been recognized that the prototype was not available previous to that date), although J. Pope-Hennessy in his catalogue of Renaissance Bronzes from the Samuel H. Kress Collection (London, 1965), no. 499, pp. 136-7, fig. 563, assigns it confidently to the second quarter of the sixteenth century. 
The Washington Lion differs from the Ashmolean's only in its tail, which falls down to the ground on the near rather than the far side of the lion, and in its rougher surface. But the tail in the case of the Washington Lion is joined and so might be a replacement or wrongly reattached, and the rougher surface turns out on careful examination to be created by a dark brown varnish which, where it has worn off, in the lion's mane, exposes chiselling as sharp and careful as in the Ashmolean's version. It is unlikely that a craftsman who had taken such trouble to tool his bronze would have obscured his workmanship in this way, and it seems probable that the varnish was applied by an unscrupulous dealer later in the nineteenth century to fool connoisseurs into thinking that it was a Renaissance piece. This ploy, which was so successful, depended upon a low estimate of nineteenth-century craftsmanship and a lack of interest in the Museo Pio- Clementino among such connoisseurs-and of course upon the fact that the Ashmolean's bronze was neither publicly displayed nor published. 
A pair of small bronze statuettes after groups of mastiffs attacking stags in the Sala degli Animali which were lot 126 at Sotheby's, London, on 12 April 1990 seemed to be of similar colour metal, to be finished with similar precision, and 
to have identical Siena marble slabs. 
 
Workshop of Massimiliano SOLDANI (1658-1750) 
88. Autumn (Pomona) 
30.7 cms. (height excluding the plinth); 2.5 cms. (height of plinth); 11 cms. (length of plinth); 8.9 cms. (width of plinth) 
Bronze with a blackened varnish scratched and worn especially on the back to reveal a cool pale green and tan natural patina. Some traces of golden colour remain, especially on the neck. Hollow, lost- wax, cast. Thick walls. The plinth separately cast and the figure attached by threaded tangs projecting from the hollowed interiors of the feet (but the plinth has been filled with wax, cement, and wood). The machined gilt metal strap around the lower part of the plinth has been added to conceal the projection of a wooden block set into it. Plugs are easily perceived in the back of the figures, each 0.5 cms. in diameter. 
Purchased 1963 as 'Flora' from Alfred Spero, 4 Park Mansions Arcade, Knightsbridge. Registered on 25 November. 
Soldani's corespondence with his patron Johann Adam, prince of Liechtenstein (1666-1712), reveals that in July of 1701 the Florentine sculptor had had, for some time, in his possession a set of clay statuettes which reproduced the most notable statues, mostly antique, in the city of Florence. They had been made by one of his pupils under his supervision. From piece-moulds of these he could supply wax statuettes. From these stone enlargements could be cut by local craftsmen for the prince's palace garden in Vienna, as the prince had suggested. From them bronzes could also be made for the prince's cabinet. The prince did not like the dozen waxes sent to him early in 1702, but by December 1706 Soldani had made the bronzes anyway and offered them to the prince who was still not interested. This probably indicates the period at which the bronzes became available, but the Medici might reasonably be supposed to have been given a set already and they are likely to have served as diplomatic gifts. A group was in the collection of Johann Wilhelm, elector palatine, a son-in-law of Grand Duke Cosimo III de' Medici, as is shown by the inventory of the Düsseldorf Gallery on its transfer to Mannheim in 1730. However, the Liechtenstein correspondence makes it clear that the original initiative was not a courtly commission but a speculative venture, and the number of surviving casts, as well as the provenance of some of them, reveals that these reproductions were available to, and were perhaps designed for, the wealthy travellers whose importance for Italian sculptors was steadily increasing. This is the market which, later in the century, Roman founders such as Boschi, Righetti, and Zoffoli (see Nos. 15-16, 79-81, 110-15) were to supply with similar small bronze souvenirs of the antique. The whole episode has been explored, and Soldani's series reconstructed, with exemplary scholarship, by Klaus Lankheit in 'Eine Serie barocker Antiken: Nachbildungen aus der Werkstatt des Massimiliano Soldani', Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archeologischen Instituts, Roemische Abteilung, 66 (1958), 186-98. To this Charles Avery's article 'Soldani's Small Bronze Statuettes after "Old Master" Sculptures in Florence', 
 
Studies in European Sculpture (London, 1981), 122-32, forms an indispensable supplement. 
The Ashmolean's Autumn, which is recorded by neither Lankheit nor Avery, exists in at least three other versions: 
ce is in the Gewerbemuseum, Nuremberg (Lankheit, op. cit., pl. 60, no. 3), another is in a private collection, Toronto, companion with a Vestal Virgin (Paintings and Sculptures, Heim Gallery, London (June-Aug. 1967), 11, nos. 24-5; Avery, op. cit. 126, pl. 4), and a third is in the reserve collection of the Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, Munich (69/29). Unlike the other bronzes in Soldani's series it corresponds with a type of bronze statuette well known in antiquity, of which there are fine examples in the British Muscum (no. 1513) and in the Ashmolean Museum, Department of Antiquities (1971.1159). This, however, is a coincidence and Soldani's model was certainly a large marble statue in the Uffizi which had been admired in Florence for over a hundred years (G. Mansuelli, Galleria degli Uffizi: Le sculture, i (Rome, 1958), 154, no. 124, pl. 120). The correspondence in the body is exact except that the drapery in the bronze is freed from the extra supports in the marble (supports needed because the marble was itself derived from a bronze prototype). The heads however are quite different. That on the marble in the Uffizi today is not antique but is an old restoration recorded in the engraving of the statue (as a Pomona) which served as plate LXIII of Gori's Museum Florentinum, vol. iii, published in 1734. Soldani's bronze must record an earlier restoration, for there is no other instance in the series of bronzes of such a departure from the original prototype. It therefore possesses considerable interest as documenting a restoration which came to be regarded as inappropriate and was replaced. The restoration in question may well have been one for which Giovanni Battista Foggini or even Soldani himself had been responsible-certainly its lyrical radiance is very much in their manner. 
Probably by Massimiliano SOLDANI (1658-1750) 
89. Soldier saint pleading 
17.2 cms. (height including integral bronze plinth); 1.25 cms. (height of integral bronze plinth); 6.2 cms. (length of plinth); 5.8 cms. (width of plinth) 
Bronze with black to brown varnish worn to reveal a chocolate brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. A crack across the figure's right heel. Near it is a plug; there is another in the figure's left leg above the knee-both are 0.2 cms. in diameter. There is a crack in the figure's left thigh under the chain mail. A band of bronze 0.1 cms. wide in the figure's right leg just above the knee presumably indicates a repair or join. 'B. 422.' is painted in white on the side of the integral bronze plinth behind the figure. The hollow plinth appears to have been given extra weight by a second pouring of bronze which conceals the point of contact with one foot, but in the indentation, which connects with the other foot, there are traces of solder and also of an iron pin. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888 and given by him later in the same year. B. 422 in his catalogues. In his notebook catalogue he records that it was 'bought of Hatfield' (for whom see Nos. 55, 264, 265), presumably after 1857 when the preliminary catalogue, in which it was not included, was compiled. 
Fortnum considered that his figure perhaps represented Ulysses in the act of pleading. He attributed both it and a statuette of a warrior drawing a sword to Adriaen de Vries (No. 95), noting that it was 'elaborated with the greatest care, agreeing precisely in manner and workmanship with the figures in relief on the cuirass of the portrait of Rudolf II in the South Kensington Museum'. However, he also observed that it was 'exaggerated, almost Berninesque in manner' which would of course imply a later, seventeenth-century date, such as now seems certainly correct for it. 
Fortnum noted that he had seen one or two later and inferior casts of the figure. None are known to me, but there is a wax version, about half-size (7.92 cms. high), in the Doccia porcelain factory, less precisely detailed, with the head differently positioned, and the figure's right hand intended to hold something (K. Lankheit, Die Modellsammlung der Porzellanmanufaktur Doccia (Munich, 1982), no. 913, pl. 227). The wax models in the factory were obtained by its founder, Marchese Ginori, from the heirs of the leading families of Florentine sculptors, the Foggini and Soldani. This particular figure is considered by Lankheit to be perhaps by Vincenzo Foggini. Jennifer Montagu, who first pointed out the connection with the wax model (letter to Gerald Taylor of 16 December 1970), suggested that it might correspond with a 'Giorgio Martire', one of a list of ten saints in an inventory of models at Doccia made in about 1780 (Lankheit, op. cit. 154). She also wondered whether it might be associated with a set of four statuettes recorded in a catalogue of the collection of 'modelli e figure di terracotta, di Bossolo, d'avorio e d'ebano' in the 'Museo' of Antonmaria Biscioni, grandducal librarian in the mid-eighteenth century. (K. Lankheit, Florentinische Barockplastik (Munich, 1962), 284, doc. 354.) These statuettes were said to be 'della mano di Massimiliano Soldani, e sono tutte di buon lavoro e in 
133 
 
buona stato'. They represented St Andrew ‘appoggiata alla Croce', 'un S. Pontefice' (a papal saint), St Augustine, and a 'S. Miniato Guerriere'. These were said to be 'circa un 
which quarto di Braccio' in height, that is about 14.6 cms., fits this figure if the fraction was approximate. There is in a private collection in London, as Dr Montagu has pointed out, a bronze St Augustine, clutching folios and extending a flaming heart, which has the same proportions, long, amply bearded face, large hands, swaying pose, look of pious desperation, and shape of plinth. It is also of similar size (19.5 cms.; the extra height being caused by his mitre). There is also, in another private collection, a statuette of a papal saint of very similar size and style. The only problem with this hypothesis is that, although the Ashmolean's bronze is of a warrior saint, he is unlikely to be St Miniato, who is represented as a younger man and usually crowned. He looks more like a St George or a St William of Aquitaine or even a St Longinus. On the other hand the compiler was no expert he could not identify the papal saint-and might have hastily 
assumed that Miniato, as the best-known Florentine warrior saint, was intended. The group seems somewhat miscellaneous and the saints may once have formed a different, larger group. In any case they must have come from a setting which was dismantled before they entered a 'Museo'. Both the 
Ashmolean warrior saint and the St Augustine require a pretext for their demonstrative poses which a miniature domestic altar of architectural character might supply. The poses recall the rhetoric characteristic of saints on the skyline of baroque churches. Among Soldani's smaller works in bronze the best comparison for the expressive face and outflung gesture is with the oval narrative reliefs of Ambrogio Sansedoni of 1692- 1700 in Palazzo Sansedoni, Siena (Lankheit, Florentinische Barockplastik, 40 and 41 especially). Equally close are the little figures made in silver gilt by Pietro Motti in 1691, after Soldani's designs, for the reliquaries of S. Alessio, S. Raimondo di Penafort, and S. Pasquale Baylon (in Cappella dei Principi, S. Lorenzo, Florence, 41, 109, and 110/1945). 
 
Probably by Massimiliano SOLDANI (1658-1750) 90 and 91. Pair of door-handles in the form of busts of lovers in 
conversation 
10.9 cms. (height of male); 11.1 cms. (height of female) 
Bronze with a warm tan natural patina. Hollow, lost-wax, casts, 
behind. Brass Bars fitted across the openings. 
open 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. B. 1068 and B. 1069 in his catalogues. 'Bought in Florence', before 1857 when included in his preliminary catalogue as nos. 14 and 15 (p. 47). 
Fortnum, who described these busts as of 'Venus or Bacchante' and 'Adonis or Bacchus', regarded them justly as 'very elegant' models and dated them to the late sixteenth or carly seventeenth century. The elegance-the melting flow of drapery and hair-and languid lyricism are more suggestive of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century and in particular of Massimiliano Soldani's sculpture in Florence (where the handles were acquired). The colour, the subtle punching in the hair, the satin finish of the flesh, are typical of Soldani's bronzes. The slightly turned-up nose, the parted lips, and the hair of the female head compares closely with the head of Psyche in the bronze group of Cupid and Psyche (Staatliche Museen, Berlin-Dahlem, 8/64; U. Schlegel, Die italienischen Bildwerke des 17. und 18. Jahrhunderts (Staatliche Museen, Berlin-Dahlem, 1978), no. 46, pl. 60), or that of the nymph to the extreme right of his relief of Autumn (or the Triumph of Bacchus), and that of the nymph in the extreme left holding a sieve in his relief of Summer (or the Triumph of Ceres) both first cast in 1708 (Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, Munich-later casts are in the Royal Collection and the Spencer Art Museum of the University of Kansas, Lawrence; terracottas are in Palazzo Pitti, Florence). The fact that these handles were not given to the Museum by Fortnum with most of the others in his collection in 1889 may indicate his special esteem for them. Busts of a slightly similar character, perhaps of the same date, serve as handles on the doors leading from the Sala del Settecento in the Uffizi Galleries. See also No. 92. 
Probably by Massimiliano SOLDANI (1656-1750) 
92. Door-handle in the form of a bust of a half-clad woman 
10.7 cms. (height) 
Bronze with a chestnut patina and a few traces of a black, or blackened, varnish. Hollow, lost-wax, cast, open behind. The threaded tang is apparently integral. 
Given by C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889. B. 1070 in his catalogues. Acquired before 1857 when included in his preliminary catalogue as no. 13 'Venus or Ariadne very graceful' (p. 47). 
As Fortnum noted, this is a duplicate of his B. 1069 (No. 91). There are only minor variations, the drapery of this version being more deeply modelled. Placing it in his preliminary catalogue before his B. 1069 (there no. 14) may suggest that he acquired it first. 
 
Style of Massimiliano SOLDANI (1658-1740) 
93. Pietà 
45.3 cms. (height); 53.7 cms. (length at lowest part); 62.8 cms. (length of wooden base); 34.7 cms. (width of wooden base) 
Terracotta of a pale cream and pink beige colour. Poorly fired. Crudely hollowed out from below. There are losses from the fourth toc of Christ's right foot, the end of the child angel's right wing, the index finger of the Virgin's right hand, the large toe of her right foot. Breaks to the right leg of Christ below the knee, the large toe of his right foot, the child angel's left wing-tip (in 1987), upper right arm, and right wrist, the right hand of Christ near the wrist, Christ's right arm at the bicep, Christ's left arm at the bicep, across his neck and upper chest, and across his abdomen have been repaired. Filled cracks-some of them probably breaks-in the Virgin's drapery near the left arm of Christ and across her left knee. The right hand of the child angel and the thumb of the Virgin are evidently modern. An old paper label inscribed 'No. 149' in ink is stuck to the underside of the group. Mounted on a plinth, irregularly oval in plan, of pine, carved and gilded. 
Purchased in May 1962 from Paul Wengraf of the Arcade Gallery, London. Registered in July. One of the first purchases made by Ian Robertson after his appointment as Keeper of the Department. 
way. 
missing 
On acquisition the group was restored, although to what extent is not clear, but presumably old repairs were revised. The restorer was against stripping the terracotta; Robertson was against the idea of restoring the Virgin's foot; a wing of the angel 'turned up' when the restoration was under The work was not attributed by the dealer, but Robertson published it as by Soldani in the Annual Report for 1962, claiming that it shows 'close affinity with a number of the artist's later compositions in bronze or porcelain media' Groups of the Pietà or Lamentation of this size were popula with Soldani, both free standing and in high relief. The puffy faced child angel tearfully contemplating (and perhaps preparing to kiss) the wound in Christ's right hand 
may be matched by a type of child popular in the sculpture of Soldar and so may the elongated and languid face of Christ. But Soldani, especially in his late work, gave drapery, hair, and rockery an agitated horizontal emphasis which is absent here A sample was taken from the unrestored portion of the plinth by Mrs Doreen Stoneham of the Oxford Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art in Marc 1987 but it was too poorly fired to obtain a firing date from thermo-luminescence tests (ref. 381-z-96). 
 
Giovanni Francesco SUSINI (active 1592; d. 1646) 94. Seated Mars 
35.4 cms. (height); 26.5 cms. (length from proper right foot to back of mound); 12.9 cms. (height of wooden plinth); 28 cms. (length of wooden plinth); 17.2 cms. (width of wooden plinth) 
Bronze with a darkened ruddy brown translucent varnish now largely worn off to reveal a golden brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast, all apparently in one piece except for the shield and the handle of the sword (now missing). The proper right check guard of the helmet has been broken off. Plugs of 0.5 cms. diameter visible (most obvious on the figure's right wrist). 'IO. FR. SVSINI/FLOR. FAC.' is chiselled in the mound upon which the god sits, beneath his right thigh. The stops are of triangular form, the letters very neat. The bronze is mounted on a moulded mahogany plinth. 
Given by Mrs Otto Gutekunst in memory of her husband in 1953. Registered on 15 July. The bronze had been bought in at Christie's, London, 25 June 1953, where it was lot 10 (with its present plinth). 
The bronze is one of a few signed examples of exquisitely finished and careful copies of celebrated antique statues which were, as we know from Baldinucci's life, a speciality of Gianfrancesco Susini, as they had been of his uncle Antonio. The antique marble, now in the Museo delle Terme, Rome, had been acquired by the Ludovisi in Rome by the first half of 1622 and was recorded as having been restored by 20 June of that year. It was generally regarded as representing Mars. (See F. Haskell and N. Penny, Taste and the Antique (London and New Haven, Conn., 1981), 260-2, for a full account of its fame.) This is probably the earliest reproduction of it. The bronze lacks the sword handle which is one of the restorations with which Bernini supplied the antique statue-but this is because it has been detached. Also absent is the Cupid playing beneath the god's extended right foot, the most notable embellishment by Bernini. This has been explained both as precocious antiquarian purism on the part of Susini or his patron and as evidence that Susini had access to the antique before it was restored. The former possibility is hinted at by Haskell and Penny, op. cit. 260, who point out that the Cupid is also excluded in the prints of the statue in de Rossi's anthology (P. A. Maffei, Raccolta di statue antiche e moderne (Rome, 1704), pl. LXVI, LXVII) and in late eighteenth- century biscuit porcelain versions. The latter possibility is stated as a fact by Pope-Hennessy (Italian Bronze Statuettes (Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 1961), no. 133). However, if the sculptor, and the subsequent draftsmen and modellers, were using casts after the antique original, these may have excluded the Cupid because of the complication in the moulds which it would have occasioned. It is, however, more probable, that Susini did include the Cupid, and it is no longer in place: it would have been separately cast (touching the Mars at no point) and so could easily have been detached. In this connection it is significant that the plinth here cannot be the original one and is unlikely to be more than a hundred years old. 
The bronze may have been one of a series of copies after notable marbles in the Ludovisi Collection: Susini also signed 
bronze versions of the Dying Gladiator (Museo Nazionale, Bargello, Florence) and one of the Hermaphrodite (Metropolitan Museum, New York)-the latter dated 1639- and Baldinucci records that he also made a copy of the Paetus and Arria. (Of these, the first and third were well-known Ludovisi pieces. On the other hand the Hermaphrodite has been supposed to be a copy of the version in the Borghese Collection, but it is surely after the version restored for the Ludovisi between 1621 and 1623, for which see Haskell and Penny, op. cit. 235). 
Among the bronzes in the collection of André Le Nôtre was 'Le dieu Mars, assis, d'après l'antique' valued at the high sum of 150 livres (J. Guiffrey, 'Testament et inventaire après décès de André Le Nôtre et autres documents le concernant', Bulletin de la Société de l'Histoire de l'Art Français (1911), 257, no. 365). This might have been the Ashmolean Susini or another version of it, although no other version has been traced. No other small bronze copy of the Mars that I have seen seems likely to have been made before 1700. 
Probably by Ferdinando TACCA (active from 1640; d. 1686) 95. Warrior drawing a sword 
14.1 cms. (height) 
Bronze with a natural chocolate-brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. There is an integral base in the form of a thin rectangular plate of bronze, cracked from the central hole whereby it is bolted to a plinth of cbonized wood. ' 423' painted in white on the upper 
surface of the base behind the feet. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888. Given later in the same year. B. 423 in his catalogues. Presumably acquired after 1857 when Fortnum compiled his preliminary catalogue in which this is 
not included. 
This little bronze was considered by Fortnum as 'assuredly' by the same hand as his no. 422 (No. 89 here)—it was the hand, he proposed, of Adriaen de Vries. C. F. Bell in his annotations to Fortnum's large catalogue noted that he did not 'feel sure' of this and recorded Bode's opinion that this bronze was perhaps Flemish of the period of Louis XIV. Jennifer Montagu in a letter to Gerald Taylor of 16 December 1970 mentioned as perhaps of significance the fact that Massimiliano Soldani is documented as having made a model of a 'Gladiatore in atto di tirare stoccata' (K. Lankheit, Die Modellsammlung der Porzellanmanufaktur Doccia (Munich, 1982), 334, doc. 671), but she considered the bronze as earlier in date. The type of balletic torsion, the arrested action, and the elongated proportions are found in several of the high relief foreground figures (almost three-dimensional statuettes) in the bronze relief of the Martyrdom of St Stephen by Ferdinando Tacca, given to S. Stefano al Ponte in Florence by Giovanni Bartolomei in 1656. And we find there the same alert face, with small chin, large eyes, and sharply tapering nose, also the same style of moustache and of armour. On the basis of comparisons with the bronze relief in S. Stefano a series of lively two-figure narrative groups with subjects from Ariosto and Ovid have been convincingly attributed to Tacca, and this bronze, which is less than half of the size of these, looks like half a group of similar character. 'It was Ferdinando Tacca', Anthony Radcliffe proposed, when publishing these groups, 'who led the way in Florence towards a new function for the small bronze group, who transformed it from an object to be handled or walked around into a sort of miniature theatre to be precisely placed upon a piece of furniture and to be seen from one view only' ('Ferdinando Tacca, the Missing Link in Florentine Baroque Bronzes', in H. Keutner (ed.), Kunst des Barock in der Toskana (Munich, 1976), 14-23—quotation taken from p. 22). In style the figure is also close to those in reliefs attributed to Fanelli but it seems likely that Fanelli derived much of his style and even took some of his models from Tacca and other Florentines (see also No. 97). 
A version of this figure was lot 151 at Christie's, London, 5 December 1989, with an attribution to Fanelli. It differed in that the metal was very brassy (it has been polished), all details were less distinct, and there was a double plinth (which strongly suggests an aftercast). That this version was from a 
 
series perhaps intended for a cabinet is suggested by the roman numeral 'VI' chiselled underneath the plinth. The nature of the plinth on the Ashmolean version strongly suggests that it too was designed to be fixed to a cabinet. A cast of the statuette was attached to a good cabinet on stand, lot 115 at Christic's, London, 5 July 1990. This was exhibited by Jonathan Harris at the 1991 Grosvenor House Antiques Fair with the information that it was recorded in an inventory of 1724 at Drayton House, Northants. The cabinet was decorated with plaques of pale beige marble with dendritic markings framed in ripple mouldings. It has been described as Flemish but may be Italian. The companion bronzes were of similar finish, but far less interesting design. 
 
Perhaps by Ferdinando TACCA (active from 1640; d. 1686) 96. Inkstand in the form of Orlando pulling the Orc from the deep 
15.4 cms. (height); 12.1 cms. (length of bronze plinth); 10.1 cms. (width of bronze plinth); 14.5 cms. (length of wooden base); 11.5 cms. (width of wooden base); 4.5 cms. (height of wooden basc) 
Bronze with a natural warm chocolate patina. There are a few traces of darkened varnish, c.g. around the strap fixing the arms to the jaw. Hollow, lost-wax, cast in one piece including the plinth. The interior is now filled with plaster of Paris in which a screw is set fixing the bronze to a walnut base. 'B.-84. F' painted white behind 
the Orc. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in October 1894 and bequeathed by him in 1899. No. 1084 in his catalogues. 'For many years in the Passerini family... At Professor Passerini's death (the entomologist) it was sent to England by Freppa the dealer and bought by me in...' The date is omitted in the large catalogue. In the earlier notebook catalogue there is a fragment of a letter by Freppa in French from Florence. The acquisition was presumably made after 1857 because it is not recorded in the preliminary catalogue compiled in that year. For Freppa see below. It is almost certainly 'the Cellini inkstand' recorded in an MS 'memoranda of prices paid' under 1860 with the very high price of £35. 
Fortnum catalogued this 'quaint and charming bronze' as Florentine of the first half of the sixteenth century. The subject, as seems first to have been pointed out to him by the dealer Freppa, comes from the most popular verse romance, not only of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Italy but of the whole of modern European literature, the Orlando furioso by Ariosto. The Orc is a sea monster placated by the inhabitants of the island of Ebuda who feed him damsels. He is first mentioned in Canto 8 when Angelica is kidnapped and chained naked to a rock to await this fate. In Canto 10 Ruggiero, flying by on his hippogriff, espies her. The Orc is approaching a huge coiling mass unlike any animal except for its head which has the protruding eyes and teeth of a boar (stanza 101). Ruggiero fights it from his flying steed with sword and lance: 
Like battle with the snapping mastiff wages The audacious fly on dusty August days 
(stanza 105) 
but he cannot penetrate the Orc's skin. Eventually he succeeds in stunning him with a reflected beam from his magic shield. He then carries off Angelica to a nearby wood and at the close of the canto he is furiously stripping off his armour, overcome with desire for her. In canto 11, Angelica saves herself just in time-making herself invisible by placing a magic ring in her mouth-and the frustrated Ruggiero is involved in another adventure. Another hero, Orlando, arrives to find the revived Orc about to devour another fair victim, Olympia. He strips off his armour, and gets in a little boat equipped with a small sword and a huge anchor. When the Orc advances upon him he jams the anchor in his open jaws: 
So prudent miners prop the tunnel as they crawl Lest as they hack the rock in front the roof behind them fall. 
(stanza 43) 
Entering the Orc's throat Orlando slashes at it with his sword. When the Orc dives he swims out and then tugs the monster, which is belching blood and thrashing foam, to shore (stanza 43). For obvious reasons Tacca has altered the relative scale of the Orc implicit in the poet's similes and he has also p the hero on the Orc's back, rather than on a nearby rock, as he hauls at the anchor cable. A part of the anchor may originally have been visible in the monster's mouth. 
put 
This certainly does not prove that the bronze is Italian, but 
there are parallels with other pieces which would seem to be Italian (compare, for example, the ornament on the integral bronze base and the convolutions of the monster's tail with ornament and tail in the inkstand with a mermaid, No. 233), 
which also support and there is the Florentine provenance, such an assumption and make us doubt the suggestion that the bronze might be German. (In addition, there is the armorial evidence set out below.) 
Fortnum and Bode seem both to have known the piece when it was still with Professor Passerini, and so did Alessandro Castellani the scholarly Roman dealer. The fact that it passed through the hands of Freppa, who was exposed, in 1868, as the employer of the forger Bastianini, might otherwise have given cause for alarm. Fortnum noted that it had long been regarded by the Passerini as 'the work of Benvenuto Cellini' and he considered that it 'has very great affinity' with Cellini and was especially reminiscent of the 'treatment' of the reliefs on the base of the Perseus in Florence and the 'action on the Vienna salt cellar'. Castellani thought it 'might be by Bambaia an opinion not shared by Dr. Bode or by me, we agreeing rather in its Cellini manner'. Bode later classed it as Venetian of about 1575 (Italian Bronze Statuettes of the Renaissance (London, 1907-12), iii, fig. 22). 
of the 
The fragmentary letter from Freppa, also referred to, reveals that he also suggested to Fortnum that the arms on the escutcheon hung by a strap over the monster's upper jaw were those of the Rondinelli family of Florence. The bearings are a chevron between three stars of six points; in chief a label of four between which are three fleurs-de-lis. The crest is a salamander. C. F. Bell seems to have further investigated the arms and noted that the lilies and label in chief-part bearings of Anjou suggest that it belonged to a family which had, or once had, Guelf affiliations. Michael Maclagan examined the arms in May 1977 at the suggestion of Christopher Lloyd and reported that they looked authentic, also distinctly Italian rather than German (the suggestion that the bronze was German had recently been made), especially because of the Guelf factor (already mentioned by Bell). He considered that it could refer to one of two Italian houses: the Lapi of Bologna or the Scarlatti-Rondinelli of Florence, more probably the latter, although their stars should normally have eight points (a detail to which a modeller might not have felt inclined to attend). 
Another version, sold on 7 April 1970 at Sotheby's, London 
140 
175), was 
(or 95), resold at Phillips, London, 30 November 1976 (lot s bought by D. Katz (then of 22 Grosvenor Square, London). It is approximately the same size but looks from photographs as if it was neither modelled nor chased with 
comparable 
e care and might even be a modified aftercast. The chief difference is that it lacks the escutcheon, the hero has no ornamental boots, and the sword blade has been broken off; but in addition many details are simplified in form and less sharply finished. The base mouldings have no corner leaves and consist of incised lines without raised rectangular elements superimposed, the rope is less defined (and is not tightly drawn), the fins and tail are less undercut and the 
fringe along the back less minutely defined. Mr Katz in his 
 
letters to the Department in 1979 observed the relationship not only with the Mermaid inkstand (No. 233) but also with the small bronze statuette of a warrior drawing a sword (No. 95) which is indeed of very similar metal, finish, and character, and it is surprising that Fortnum himself, who owned both items, did not note this connection. The figure looks very similar in the face and the armour to those by Ferdinando Tacca and it is surely relevant that among the larger groups convincingly attributed to Tacca are several from Ariosto, including one of Angelica eluding her excited saviour by placing the ring in her mouth as he tears his clothes off (Louvre 0A. 7811). 
 
After a model perhaps by Ferdinando TACCA (active from 1640; d. 1686) 
97. Marcus Curtius leaping into the gulf 
29.2 cms. (height); 44 cms. (width) 
Lead with a ruddy gold brown 'bronze finish'. The lead is partially diseased (possibly from storage in an oak cupboard), disfigured with white efflorescence, as well as scratched and bent (especially in the lower corner to proper right). An arm of the warrior by the bank to proper left has been broken off, as has part of the hero's right hand. The right forearm of the warrior nearest the rear legs of the horse is broken but not detached. The elements in highest relief-the hero and some of his mount, the head and one leg of the dog barking at him, and much of the warrior leaning forward-are separately cast and let into the relief. Scratched on the rear are the words 'PROVENANCE UNCERTAIN/THIS PLAQUE WAS FOUND IN A/RUSKIN SCHOOL CABINET (REFERENCE SERIES)/1976'. 
Provenance uncertain. See scratched inscription above. 
A bronze version of this relief measuring 27 x 41 cms. in the Staatliche Museen, East Berlin (inv. 5042), was published in E. F. Bange, Staaliche Museen zu Berlin: Bildwerke der christlichen Epochen, III, ii (Berlin, 1922), no. 53, and pl. 20, as an anonymous late seventeenth-century work. There are a number of minor variations: the Berlin version does not include a stump beneath the horse's belly but does have trees on a hill slope rising above the horse's tail; it does not include a spire on top of the distant tower, its foliage is defined more 
by punched marks than short lines, the warrior leaning forward holds his torch or baton in an upright position, and the dog appears to bite the horse's leg. Neither version is of high quality (although the bronze is superior to the lead) but they seem likely to reflect some superior prototype. Anthony Radcliffe proposed in a footnote that this might have been by Ferdinando Tacca ('Ferdinando Tacca, the Missing Link in Florentine Baroque Bronzes', in H. Keutner (ed.), Kunst des Barock in der Toskana (Munich, 1976), 23 n.) and there are numerous points of comparison with Tacca's bronze relief of the Martyrdom of St Stephen (given to S. Stefano al Ponte in Florence by Giovanni Bartolomei in 1656): in both there is a mixture of a few figures in very high, almost detached, relief with pictorial low relief and landscape; the same open poses of the high relief figures, the same densely composed choral groups, the same interpretation of antique dress, the same long-bearded sages. Francesco Fanelli has also been suggested as the author of the Berlin relief and it is similar to the reliefs of the Carrying of the Cross and the Holy Family in the Robber's House which he is known to have cast but it is not certain that these compositions were invented by him and in any case Fanelli may well have been indebted to Ferdinando Tacca or other Florentine sculptors of that date. 
Another version of this relief, in bronze, less high and with only minimal landscape background was lot 154 at Sotheby's, London, 13 December 1990. 
 
Royal porcelain factory, Naples 
After a model by Filippo Tommaso TAGLIOLINI (1745- 1809) 
98. River god 
21.55 cms. (height, including plinth); 22 cms. (length excluding projecting foot); 10.5 cms. (width) 
Biscuit porcelain, somewhat scratched and much discoloured from engrained dirt. Hollow cast, open below the plinth. There is a firing crack in the reverse of the figure. The upperside of the large toe of the god's right foot and the end of the index finger of his right hand have been broken off and are missing. No provenance recorded. 
No. 106). The full extent of his activity and the quality of his work have only become clear with the publication of Lo scultore Filippo Tagliolini e la porcellana di Napoli by Alvar 
González-Palacios (Turin, 1988). 
A list, compiled in 1805, of models made at the factory since 1776, with their prices, includes, under the section headed 'serie di figure', 'fiumi sedenti' for seven ducats (presumably each) and in the inventory of the factory, made when it was sold two years later in 1807, a number of river gods are also recorded, including a group representing the four parts of the world valued at forty-eight ducats (ibid. 171, 196). González-Palacios lists surviving versions of such river gods in Naples (one at the Museo di Capodimonte (inv. 5268) is coloured and gilded, one in biscuit is in the Museo di San Martino (inv. 273), and another is in the Museo Artistico Industriale, Naples (inv. 96) and in Turin (Museo Civico 1543). None of these is now part of a group. The first two cited are adapted from the less familiar of the two statues of the Nile in the Vatican Museum (ibid., no. 59). The Ashmolean's statuette, which is very close to this Nile statuette in size, general character, pose, and the modelling of beard and drapery, may correspond with the example in the Museo Artistico Industriale (h. 21 cms.) of which, however, no illustration is available. The plinth of the Ashmolean statuette is of a pattern, more or less regular in shape but slightly suggestive of rock-work, favoured in many antique marble sculptures whereas those of the Nile statuettes have smooth sides, but such variation is not unexpected and both forms of plinth were favoured by the factory (for other rock-work plinths see ibid., nos 3, 29, 30, 33). Further confirmation that the Ashmolean river god was modelled by Tagliolini is found in the figure of Time on a porcelain and ormolu clock in the Museo di Capodimonte which is adapted from it (González-Palacios, op. cit., no. 71). 
Having been awarded the first prize for sculpture in the Consorso Clementino at the Accademia di San Luca in Rome in 1766, Tagliolini travelled to Venice in 1767 where he worked for at least six years in a porcelain factory, moving probably soon afterwards to the porcelain factory in Vienna, whence in 1780, apparently at the request of the king of Naples and the Two Sicilies, and in company with a furnace technician, Magnus Fessler, he travelled to Naples to work for the royal porcelain factory there. By 1781 he was appointed 'capomodellatore'. He worked under the inspiring direction of the artistic adviser to the court, the learned and cultivated Marchese Domenico Venuti (1745-1817) and was responsible for modelling a succession of graceful and delicate biscuit statuettes, many of them after, or inspired by, antique statues (and especially those locally available from the Farnese Collection and the excavations at Herculaneum and Pompeii), some of them incorporated into highly ambitious groups and extravagant presentation desserts composed of numerous figures. He was chief modeller until the sale of the factory under the French in 1807 and was employed in the final years of his life in restoring antique sculpture. Tagliolini's biscuit statuettes are unmarked and have often been confused with the contemporary productions of the Volpato factory (see 
 
Unknown foundry, probably Roman 
After Bertel THORVALDSEN (1770-1844) 
99. Venus 
14 cms. (height; 4.35 cms. (diameter of base) 
Bronze with a dark grey patina, with hints of green. Very heavy, probably solid, cast. A tang project from the integral base (photographed with an improvised plasticine support) 
Given or bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum (the large catalogue is not annotated so it was probably only received after his death in 1899). B. 429 in his catalogues. According to the notebook catalogue 'bought at Naples', apparently after 1857 when the preliminary catalogue, in which it was not included, was compiled. 
Fortnum supposed that this was probably executed in Italy in about 1815 (large catalogue) or '1815-20' (notebook catalogue)—i.e. at the period of Thorvaldsen's full-size statue of which it is a miniature reproduction. Thorvaldsen created his Venus between 1813 and 1816. It was bought by the banker Henry Labouchère and taken to London, but a cast remained in the artist's studio. The cast is now in the Thorvaldsen Museum Copenhagen (A. 12), as is the marble (A. 853). A similar small bronze of the Venus is in the Museo Nazionale di Palazzo Venezia, Rome, mounted on an 
alabaster base.