443 and 444. Pair of door-handles 
in the form of fishes 
11.2 cms. (length of each handle) 
Brass, highly polished but the backplates against the walnut door 
frames with a dark brown natural patina. 
Attached to, probably made for, and possibly designed for, the 
walnut panelled interior doors of the Hill Music Room, which were 
designed 1938 and completed 1939. 
In July 1936 Alfred Hill of the firm ofwilliam E. Hill and 
Sons, then of 140 New Bond St, approached the Vice-
Chancellor with the idea of presenting to the University the 
celebrated collection of early musical instruments which he 
had formed with the help of his brother Arthur. The Curators 
of the Bodleian Library had decided by early 1937 that they 
could not find a suitable space, but the Ashmolean Museum 
was interested and had allocated the Sladc lecture room to 
receive the collection by the summer of 1937 (a new lecture 
room was created below the Draper's Gallery, then being 
planned). In October Alfred Hill first suggcstcd Allom as 
architect for the conversion of the room. Hc did so on the 
recommendation of F. H. H. Romaine Walker who was too 
ill to take on the job himself. Allom was the `leading decorator 
here and in New York'-also a noted yachtsman and golf-playcr. 
Hill's first idea was for a panelled `Georgian' room 
and Romaine Walker had dreamt of recreating the setting of 
an eighteenth-century conversation piece, but Allom, whose 
designs were probably made after the official acceptance of 
the gift in June 1938, wanted to create something Italian for 
what was a largely Italian collection. The plaster frieze which 
he supplied, consisting of shields set in scallopcd tondi and 
swags between with dainty fluttering ribbons, has a Florcntinc 
quattrocento flavour. Nothing remains of his original colour 
scheme except the remarkably accomplished imitation of pc7ide 
¢"f¢.co for the skirting, but origivally the door frame, and 
perhaps other features, were coloured to resemble P¢.e£7t¢ 
Jcye"¢. The design of the door frame caused considerable 
acrimony. Allom wanted to give it a pediment inspired by one 
on the Pazzi Chapel. Parker felt that this was inappropriate 
and the Kcepcr of the Museum, E. T. Leeds, put the case 
against the pediment in a letter to Allom of 5 October. Allom 
replied with assurances of his extensive study of Italian art: `1 
know I am right'-nd moreover Mr Hill liked his door. 
Cockerell's architecture was Greek, Allom was reminded. But 
Allom was able to point out that Cockcrell's work had many 
Italian Renaissance features. By the end of the month the 
Visitors had rcjccted the pediment. The door itself is a 
handsome if conventional design and made of splendidly 
figured walnut. The stylized dolphin-like fish used for the 
entirely modern handles were as popular in Greece in the fifth 
and fourth centuries BC as in Italy in the fifteenth and 
sixteenth centuries AD. They would certainly have met with 
Cockcrell's approval and seem not to have excited any 
disapproval within the Museum. But then the war interrupted 
the whole debate and by the time the Room was officially 
opened in 1950 Allom was dead.
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Galizia foundry, Chatficld Road, Battersea, Ijondon 
After Kenneth ARMITAGE CBE (b. 1916) 
445. The Bed 
11.8 cms. (height); 21.4 cms. (length) 
Bronze with a uniform black patina. I.ost-wax cast, the fuller foms 
open below. Incised in the model at the lower edge of the taller 
vertical element `2/6' and `65 KA'. 
From the collection of Christophcr Hewett ( 1938-83) given to the 
Museum by his family in June 1985 and included in the exhibition 
celebrating the dft held in the MCAlpine Gallery in January and 
February 1987 (no.12 in the catalogue). A charcoal drawing and a 
photo-etching by Armitage were also included in the gift to the 
Museum. Three drawings and two sculptures by him from Hcwctt's 
collection were presented at the same time to the Henry Moore 
Centre for the Study of Sculpture at Leeds City Art Gallery. 
Armitage had exhibited at Hewett's Taranman Gallery in 1982. 
The sculptor explained that this sculpture origivated in the 
spectacle of a friend crossly burying her head under the bcd-linen, 
thus inadvertently exposing her buttocks. `Thcre were 
two different versions of this tiny piece but similar in size. 
Thcrc was also a very much bigger version in white fibre-glass.' 
It was cast in an edition of six in 1965. The theme of 
combining human forms with furniture is found in other more 
recent work by Armitage such as his three bronze Cf7¢¢.7tf (of 
1981; nos.1-3 in the Taranman exhibition of 1982, where 
au arc mustrated). 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps after Thomas BANKS ( 1735-1805) 
446. Contemplation (Pudicitia) 
42 cms. (height including integral base of 2.4 cms.) 
Plaster. White discoloured to grey. Hollow cast. Some small chips 
missing from head and back of base. The hollow containing a label 
inscribed in pen `Presented by the Misses Bullock-Webster 1916' 
and the base itself pasted with two paper labels inscribed in pen in 
a hand of c.1900 `Contemplation. / modelled by / Thomas Banks. 
RA. Sculptor/Born 1735 Died 1805' and `a friend of gt. 
grandfather / and mother Edward & Rachel Webster / and given to 
them by him / with other models and medallions / which were not 
kept.' (The name is not certainly Webster.) 
Given by the Misses Bullock-Webster,1916 (A""#¢/ RcPo# ( 1916), 
14). 
The plaster came to the Museum under the Kccpership of 
C. F. Ben who claimed Banks as a forebear and was probably 
already collecting the material on him which he would 
eventually publish (more out of antiquarianism and piety than 
any high estimate of the sculptor's ability) as A»»¢/f a/T77oov¢f 
Bo»fu (Cambridge,1938). And yet in that volume no mention 
is made of this statuette. Bell recognized that it was a cast of 
a furly accurate copy of the portrait statue in the Vatican 
Collection known as the £¢.pG.a A4:¢#G¢. or P#dG.c¢.f¢.a and much 
esteemed in the eighteenth century (see F. Haskcll and N. 
Penny, T¢#G ¢»d £4G A„f¢.g#c (Ijondon and New Haven, 
Conn.,1981), 300-I) and he may therefore have dismissed 
the legend that it was by Banks. And yet some connection 
with him is likely. It might merely be a cast of a copy by 
someone else which was in the sculptor's studio, but that 
Banks was interested by the figure is probable, especially 
when we consider his paraphrase of other notable antique 
figures for the captives around the pedestal of the monument 
to Captain Richard Rundell Burgess in St Paul's (the model 
for which was exhibited in 1802). And that he did make 
reduced and modified copies after the antique is demonstrated 
by the medallions of A4lo#g¢.„g and EPG"¢.„g commissioned 
from hin by Sir John Soane for the pendentivcs of the ceihng 
of the Old Dividend Office in the I.othbury Court of the 
Bank of England (now dcstroycd) which were based on 
terracotta versions which he is said to have made in Rome 
and which arc now in Sir John Soane's Museum (Bell, op. 
cit. 147). Indeed the latter may well be connected with the 
`models and mcdallions' mentioned on the old label. The 
ways in which the plaster differs from the antique marble are 
compatible with Banks's taste: the figurc's right hand is drawn 
closer into her drapery, the hair and diadem are altered, the 
veil falls more softly over her left shoulder, and there are 
adjustments to the length of drapery falling in front of her 
left arm. 
\
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknown foundry 
After Gilbert William BAYES ( 1872-1953) 
447. Sigurd 
71.9 cms. (height of bronze group); 36 cms. (length of integral 
bronze plinth); 27 cms. (width of bronze plinth); 17.4 cms. 
(height of marble block); 44.4 cms. (length of marble block); 
28.2 cms. (width of marble block); 99.5 cms. (height of wooden 
pedestal); 81 cms. (length of wooden pedestal); 43 cms. (width 
of wooden pedestal) 
Bronze with a dark brown patina deliberately worn to a golden 
brown in some areas in relief (such as the dragon on his saddle-cloth 
and the helmet ornament), with some blue and green enamel 
in champleve fields of the saddle-cloth and bridle. Hollow cast, by 
the sand-cast method, in pieces. The plinth was cast separately and 
its underside reveals, at the points of contact with the three hoofs, 
the iron armature inside the cast of the horse. The rider and horse 
were cast separately, as were the parts of the bridle and saddle-cloth 
decorated with enamel. In the case of the saddle-cloth this is only 
apparent at the points of contact with the horse's back legs and the 
hero's feet. The reins and sword strap of pliable copper are added. 
The latter has been broken off: the rivet originally attaching it to 
the flapping cloak remains. `GILBERT BATES / 1910' is chiselled in 
the bronze across the corner of the plinth by the horse's back right 
hoof. In raised letters of `Lombardic' form around the four sides of 
the plinth is the following text: `He . who . would . win . to /the . 
Heavens . & . bc . as . the . Gods . on . high/ must . tremble . 
nought . at . /the . road . & . the . place . where . men . folk . 
die'. The bronze plinth is mounted on, but unsecured to, a marble 
block decorated with panels in sunk relief with some gilding now 
mostly worn off, chipped, scratched, discoloured with dirt and with 
red paint. This block is, in turn, mounted on, but unsccured to, a 
wooden pedestal, painted to resemble stone, decorated with panels 
in sunk relief. Above the higher ffieze of figures on one side arc the 
names `BRyNHILD . GRIMHILD . GUDRUN' with the text above the 
lower frieze: `AND . LO . THE . HoPE . oF . THE . PEol>LE ; THE 
DAys . oF . A . KING . ARE . BEGUN' and on the opposite side 
`GUNNAR', `HOGNI', `GOGGORM', on the banners held by the warriors 
in the higher frieze. The painting on the pedestal is generally 
discoloured with dirt and is also flaking. The separate wooden 
elements are dividing where formerly glued and are also splitting. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in 1927. Acquired by 
him in 1910 in substitution for an earlier cast of the same figure 
(see below). The pedestal had been completed in March 1910 and 
the marble base made in June in the previous year. No. I on Andrew 
Shirley's receipt of January 1927. 
S¢j#7i¢ was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1909 (as 
no.1834, S¢j"7i¢-eg#ctrr¢.¢7? f£#f#c#G, 47io7£2;e). Bayes had 
made his reputation with sculpture of horses and his interest 
in Nordic mythology had been evident as carly as 1894 when 
he exhibited 777c r¢.dc a/£¢G V¢/ky7p¢.cf at the Royal Academy. 
S¢j#7:¢ is the hero of the E/¢Gy E¢de, a source made available 
to the educated public of that period by William Morris's 
vcrstror\, The Story Of Sigurd the Volsung. Here. he tildes Grey 
Fell (Sft of Odin), holding aloft the maric sword Gram or 
Wrath, having slain the dragon Fafhir. The dragon is 
represcntcd on his helm-crest and saddle-cloth. The Branstock 
tree, emblematic of the Volsung dynasty, is represcntcd in 
enamel on the saddle-cloth. 
Brocklebank offered £150 (presumably the asking price) 
for the bronze on 17 June 1909 probably as soon as he saw 
it and Bayes promptly rcplicd accepting this offer on 18 June. 
This reply is the first of a series of letters from him to 
Brocklebank which survive in the Department's archive. 
Brocklcbank, doubtless realizing that the bronze needed to 
be seen from all sides, and was, with its marble base, too large 
and heavy to be placed on any existing piece of furniture, 
asked the sculptor to design a pedestal for it. On 30 June 
Bayes thanked Brocklebank for his cheque, observed that the 
last day of the Academy exhibition is `always the Aug. Bank 
Hohday', and concluded, `1 shall be roughing out the sketch 
for the base shortly 8c will send it up to you.' On 17 August 
he wrote, apologizing that the bronze had not returned from 
the Academy when he left town but he expected to bc in 
I.ondon the following week and, as soon as he had made `a 
note of the carving on the marble and the colour scheme, so 
that the pedestal may bc in keeping with them', hc would 
have the group packed up and sent. `In the meantime I enclose 
a sketch of what I propose. The carving on it is very simple 
incised carving with colour introduced into the deep sunk 
background of the reliefs 8c patterns.' 
Brocklebank was obviously impatient and a lcttcr from 
Baycs dated 25 August apolodzcs for the delay and promises 
to dispatch the group on 27 August; then one of 27 August 
apolodzes for it not being sent owing to a misunderstanding 
but assures Brocklcbank that it will go first thing tomorrow. 
`1 have had the marble 8c bronze packed separately as being 
safer, the screw, nut, & stcading pin being packed with the 
marble.' He added that `1 hope you received the sketch design 
for the wooden pedestal that I sent you from abroad. Will 
you let mc have it back when you have decided how you hke 
it.' It is possible that Brocklebank was irritated by the delay 
for Bayes wrote on 6 September expressing the hope that the 
group had arrived safely, not having heard that it had done 
so (a courtesy he would certainly have expected). In the next 
letter of 24 February 1910 Baycs sincerely regrets `having 
been so long upon the ``Sigurd" base but a number of 
un-expected things turned up in connection with it' and 
concludes that he hopes to send it within the month. On 15 
March he announced that he was sending it on the following 
evening. 
I have lost all sense of the wood er given it a `granulated' surface as 
you suggested erhave kept the top panels low in tone to lead up 
to the bronze. 
In the front of the base the upper panel represents the three 
Niblung brothers Gunnar, Hogni, 8c Guttom; the relief below, 
`the funeral of Sigurd'. 
On the back are the three women Blynhild, Grimhild 8c Guchm 
who had played the most important part in the life of Sigurd. 
Below is the child Sigurd being taken to RIng Elf to be named, 
with an inscription above `and lo, the hope of the people, the days 
ofa king are begun'. On the capitals are the ravens of odin `Thought' 
er'`Speech'. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
You will find the base so solidly constructed that it will need no 
further weighting, in fact I found it an advantage to have casters. 
I trust you understand how sorry I am to have kept you waiting 
so long, but each stage, the making, carving, gilding c?colouring 
ran into more time that I had anticipated. 
There was, it sccms, no reply to this from Brocklebank who 
was perhaps again irritated by the delay and also by the bill 
for £50 which may have accompanied Bayes's letter. `1 have 
been hoping to hear from you as to whether you like the base 
8c if the colouring suits the room', wrote Bayes on 3 April 
with a brevity that surely also imphed that he expected 
payment. On 12 April he wrote as follows: 
I am in receipt of yours givam glad to hear that you think the base 
suits the `Sigurd' very well. 
It is unfortunate that you think it expensive at £50 as it shows 
that the measure of your appreciation docs not equal the amount 
of work and thought I have expended upon it. 
I should myself have liked to add side panels but as it was costing 
me up to the amount you wished to pay, I had reluctantly to 
abandon the idea. You are probably wanting a base with much less 
thought & labour 8[ would prefer to spend a lesser sum upon it. 
In that case now that a suitable base has been thought out could 
not your local joiner, that you mentioned, make an inexpensive one 
for you leaving out the art? Doubtless a second one made from that 
which is already thought out could be made more cheaply for you. 
The price I had to pay for mine would astonish you I can see from 
your letter. 
If you decide to have a less expensive one, would you be good 
enough to let me have mine back at your earliest convenience as I 
will make use of it myself. 
This worked, and on 20 April Bayes wrote thanking 
Brocklcbank for his 
letters & cheque, & expression of appreciation of `Sigurd'. I hope 
as time goes on the base will further increase your liking of the 
work as a whole. Should it not I will exchange it for a statuette. 
I was glad to have your assurance that I had removed any doubts 
you might have had as to my straightforwardness in the matter & 
shall be glad to show you the work I have in my studio when you 
care to pay me a visit. 
I did not take much care of the little water colour sketch during 
the construction of the base & damaged it while making a couple 
of clay models from it. 
In the meantime Bayes had made a revised version of the 
group and this was exhibited at the Royal Academy (no. 1913, 
Sigurd-Statuette, bron2;e and enunel). In the oritrnal S±g\ird 
had held aloft the ring Andvaranant which Fafiiir had guarded. 
In this version hc held his sword. Brocklcbank considered this 
alteration to be an improvement. `1 will have a photograph 
of Sigurd 11 sent off tomorrow', Bayes wrote to him on 18 
June 1910. 
It is not a very good one but was taken at the last moment before 
the bronze was sent off to the Academy. I am interested to hear 
you like the alteration but regret it should make you jealous. 
Would you care for me to have a fourth cast made similar to the 
Academy one and let you have it in place of yours? 
Bayes could not offer the cast on exhibition at the Academy 
because it had been purchased under the terms of the 
Chantrey Bequest for the Tate Gallery (no. 2739-reserve 
collection). 
An undated letter of either late June or early July informed 
Brocklebank that he was thinking of having another cast made 
of S¢j"%¢ `for the Rome International next year Cr as I 
gathered from your letter that this year's Sigurd was the 
favourite I am willing to have an extra cast made for you giv 
send the one you now have to the Exhibition. There will be 
no extra expense involved a this arrangement will I think 
please you better.' 
Evidently Brocklebank agreed to this proposal and on 5 
July Bayes explained that it would be thrcc or four months 
before the exchange could be arranged. On 29 October he 
explained that the marble base need not bc sent (so this can 
be dated to 1909) and also that the new cast might take a few 
days more than anticipated `as one of the smaller enamels has 
bccn troublesome and requires a fresh piece casting'. The 
bronze was no. 1078 in the British Section of the 
International Fine Arts Exhibition. 
An additional letter by Bayes concerning the group survives 
in the Department's archives dated 19 December 1927 in 
response to an enquiry concerlring the sculpture by Andrew 
Shirley. Bayes cxplaincd that Brocklebank's bronze was a 
replica of the Chantrey purchase now in the Tate Gallery 
which was exhibited in 1910 but adding the information that 
the `wooden pedestal was executed for Mr Brocklebank-the 
following year'. It was in fact cxccuted for him in the year 
following his purchase of the 1909 Academy version, as we 
have seen. The whole business is made more confusing by 
the fact that the most accessible published illustration of 
SGj#71¢ is fig. 197, pl. CVII, of Herbert Maryon's A4lodG" 
Sc#/Pfz¢7.c (I.ondon,1933), in which a bronze of the first type 
is captioned as being in the Tate Gallery. On the whole the 
first type-with the ring-seems to have been the most 
popular and scvcral casts of it are known: one, formerly 
belonging to Sir George Frampton, was with the Armstrong-
Davis Gallery in Arundel, Sussex, in 1985 (when illustrated 
in an adrcrtisemer[t in the National Art-Collections Fund 
Rcp¢.ew), one was sold at Sotheby's, I.ondon, 12 April 1985 
(lot 257), one remains in the Bayes family collection, and 
another is in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. Something 
of the reputation which the sculpture enjoyed for its complex 
dynamism (which provides a link between the New Sculpture 
and the angular realism of H. S. Jagger) is conveyed by 
Maryon's praise: `probably no other equestrian group extant 
. . . would better repay a prolonged study of its composition'. 
7
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Wuan BEHNES ( 1795-1864) 
448. Portrait bust of Samuel 
Woodbum 
67.8 cms. (height); 12.9 cms. (height of soclc); 123.2 cms. (height 
of pedestal) 
Carrara marble. Bust is chisellcd behind on the supporting shaft (as 
li:;utalo¥t:r:::n=S!:;:stBeEdH::e/alsscou:;cro=D::i::e:2i.h:tfcie 
is set on a Camra marble columnar pcdcstal made in three pieces: 
base, principal shaft, and top recessed section of shaft. The pedestal 
is chiseued with dlded letters: `SAMUEL WooDBURN / 1786- 
1853 / THROUGH WIIOSE PUBLIC SPIRIT / THE LAWRENCE 
COLLECTION / OF DRAWINGS BY / RAPHAEL AND 
MICHEIANGELO / WAS SECURED FOR / THE UNIVERSITY / 1845'. 
This must bc the bust, or a version of the bust, exhibited by Behnes 
at the Royal Academy in 1833 (no.1201, `Marble bust, Sanucl 
Woodbum, Esq. '). It was presumably commissioned by Woodbum, 
and was inherited after his death in 1853 by his sister by whom it 
was bequeathed to the University in 1865. Recorded in the 
Donations Book on p. 54 a.s bequeathed by the sitter's `brother 
Miss Woodhouse'. More correctly recorded in the H¢„dfroofe G#¢.de 
of 1865 as in `the Fireproof Gallery containing the Raphacls and 
Michclangelos . . . bequeathed by his sister Miss Woodbumc'. C. F. 
Bell recorded in his first report as Keeper of the newly formed 
Department of Fine Art in 1908 that he had set up, in niches at the 
top of the principal staircase, Guelfi's busts of the Pomfiets (scc 
Nos. 516, 517), and, in the same spirit of institutional piety, `an 
appropriate inscription was cut upon the base of Samuel Woodbum 
by W. Behncs, which has been placed in another of the niches'- 
prcsunably the central one subsequently occupied by the /#¢¢.*¢ 
(No. 473) and now by the E¢#/ a/Ar#"de/ (No. 472). The bust was 
cleaned by REthleen Kimber and C. P. Bartram of the Department 
of Antiquities in the 1970s. 
A ful account of woodburn's part in the acquisition of the 
drawings by Raphael and Michelangelo, formerly in the 
collection of sir Thomas Lawrence, is given in Sir Karl Parker's 
introduction to his catalogue of the Ashmolean's Italian 
drawings. Woodbun bought the great collection of drawings 
(which he had himself helped Lawrence to fom) after 
Lawrence's executors falcd to dispose of them as I.awrence 
had hoped. Then, in accordance with I.awrence's wishes, but 
with a patience Lawrence could not have anticipated, 
Woodburn delayed selling them in case they could bc placed, 
as the group by Raphael and Michelangelo eventually were, 
in a public institution. 
In 1832 Behnes was at the height of his powers, but already 
encountering some financial difficulties. Bankrupt in 1861, 
he died, a pauper in the Middlesex Hospital, three years later, 
a year before this bust was presented. 
10 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Sir Joseph Edgar BOEHM (Joscf 86hm) ( 1834L90) 
449. Portrait bust of John Ruskin 
59.5 cms. (height) 
Terracotta, hollow slip-cast as one piccc (including waisted square 
soclc). The interior is a hot orange colour, the exterior toned with 
a paler clay slip applied in very liquid form (granules are caught in 
whiskers and hairs on proper left side of face). Incised `BOEHM fecit', 
the `fecit' partially illcdble. The indistinct lettering, like the bluntness 
of details such as buttonholes, suggests that there was little hand-finishing 
after casting. The shirt-collar to proper left has bccn 
chipped. 
Presented by T. W. G. Acland in 1932, in accordance with the wishes 
of his father, Dr Thcodore Dyke Acland, who had died in April 
1932. Dr Acland had presumably inherited it from his father, 
Ruskin's ffiend Sir Henry Wentworth Acland Bt. (see No. 549). 
T. W. G. Acland wrote to the Director of the Taylor Institution 
offering the bust on 17 February 1932, and then sent a copy on 20 
April, having had no reply. The Secretary of the Taylorian called on 
the Kccper of the Ashmolean (E. T. Lecds) on 22 April. heeds 
wrote to Acland explaining that he must have intcndcd the 
Ashmolean not the Taylorian and asking him to walt until Mr Clark, 
Keeper of the Department of Fine Art, returned from abroad. Leeds 
then forgot about the matter. Acland wrote again on 6 October. 
Lecds replied on 10 October saying that Clank would like to know 
more about it. Clearly there was some uncertainty as to the 
desirabilfty of the gift (the marble version being already in the 
Museum). However, on 23 October Grace Muirhead, who had 
bccn housing the bust, wrote that she would deliver it to the 
Museum on the following day and would collect it later if it were 
not wanted. It was never collected. 
The plaster version of Boehm's statue of Ruskin's hero Carlyle, 
which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1875, was 
praised by Ruskin in high terms in his Ac¢dc7„y Nofcf for that 
year ( Wo#fa, 39 vols., Library Edition (London, 1903-12), 
xiv. 288-9) as `a noble piece of portraiture' recording both 
`mind and features' of `my dear master'. Ruskin approved of 
Boehm's style as an alternative to the `Hellenic academy 
sculpture'. He was taken by Carlyle to Boehm's studio where 
the sculptor delighted him-`f#c¢ a duck-the very ideal of 
noblest intense Germanism', he wrote to Mrs Severn on 26 
June; `a jewel, not a Jew. A perfect type of intense blue-eyed 
Harz-bred Germany', hc wrote to Charles Eliot Norton on 
15 July (ibid. xxxvii. 169). Although born in Vienna, Boehm 
was in fact of Hungarian extraction. Ruskin hoped Boehm 
would ask to `do' him, but the first mention of a sitting comes 
in a letter, probably of November 1879, to his friend Dr Henry 
Acland (later Sir Henry): `For the bust I shall only be too 
trad to sit to Boehm anywhere and any time hc likes, and 
will stay in town as long as necessary.' On 1 December that 
year he informed Miss Sara Anderson that he was going `over 
to Kensington every day to Boehm for clay yet more "like" 
than Herkhomer'. Alfred Gilbert, then acting as Bochm's 
assistant, recaued (or claimed to recall) the comedy of trying 
to conceal busts of Millais from Ruskin and busts of Ruskin 
from Millais (I. MCAllister, A//rc¢ GG./4G# (I.ondon, 1929), 
34-5). When asked by Marion Harry Spielmann for 
recollections of the sittings, Boehm would reveal nothing but 
did claim that he `never saw any face on which the character 
and the inside of the man was so clearly written. He can never 
have tried to dissimulate' (`Some Portraits of John Ruskin', 
A4¢g#2;¢.„c a/A# ( 1891 ),122). Ruskin himself was a little 
uneasy about the bust, describing it as of `extreme and, more 
than I quite like, historical veracity' ( 777G Br¢7¢n.7ood DG.¢7rfef 
a/7o4» A"jfe¢.79, ed. H. G. Viljoen (New Haven, ConTri.,1971 ), 
535). 
The bust was first exhibited in terracotta at the Royal 
Academy exhibition in 1880 (no.1635) and it has been 
assumed that this is the version now in the Ashmolcan 
M:usoum (M. Stockel. Royalist and Realist: The itfie a,nd 
Work Of Sir Joseph Edyar Boehm (INow Yock and I+ondon, 
1988), 411). A flyshcct was published in Oxford on 27 May 
1880 drawing attention to a full-length sketch in clay, also to 
bust portraits one of which was on view at the Royal Academy 
(as mentioned above), the other on view in the Turner Room 
at the University Galleries. `Friends have cxpresscd a desire 
that a statue of the author of A4lo¢e77¢ P#¢.7¢£g7tf should bc 
placed in the School of Drawing, Oxford, which owes its 
existence to his generosity and bears his name.' An appeal for 
subscriptions had been pubhshed in 777c T¢.owcf on the day 
before, with Prince Leopold and the marquess of salisbury 
among the conimittcc members. The scheme, engivecred by 
Acland, did not cnd in triumph. `Ultimately a marble bust 
was placed in the Ruskin Drawing School', Ruskin's editors 
observe. 
The marble bust survives in the present premises of the 
Ruskin School in the High Street. It is notably more precise 
in detail than the terracotta version in the Ashmolean, showing 
for example the buttonholes of the lapel more clearly and 
even the rclicf stitching around them. It is also larger in size, 
being 64 cms. high, on a soclc with a plinth 19 cms. square. 
This proves that the Ashmolean's terracotta is not the origival 
clay model (if that survived) but was made from the plaster 
cast of that origival clay, which would also have served as the 
prototype for the marble-whereas the marble would have 
turned out the same size as that plaster cast, the terracotta 
cast would have shrunk in firing. At least two terracottas were 
made: two are recorded today, that in the Ashmolean Museum 
and one in a private collection in Ijondon. There may well 
be others. A bronze cast is said to be in the Geelong Art 
Gallery, Victoria, Australia, a plaster cast is in the National 
Portrait Gallery, I.ondon (Stockcr, op. cit. 411 ), and another 
is in the Ruskin Gallery, Sheffield. Such plaster casts could 
bc made from the moulds used for the terracotta edition, but 
only after the latter had been completed, since the greasy 
parting agent placed in the interior of the assembled mould 
for casting plasters rcndcrcd it unfit for the clay, which needed 
to be dried by contact with untreated plaster (a process 
explained by Boehm in a letter of 31 December 1878 to 
Thomas Dixon quoted by Stocker, op. cit. 232). If, as would 
seem likely, the bust in the Ruskin School of Drawing is the 
only version in marble, then it was the one exhibited by 
Bochm at the Grosvenor Gallery in 1881. There seems to bc 
11
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
no evidence that it was executed previous to the subscription 
in 1880. The clay sketch for a full-length statue has not been 
traced. 
Ruskin continued to be impressed by Boehm's work and 
gave him a commission for `twelve flat medallions, Florentine 
manner, life size, of six British men ind six British women, of 
typical character in beauty; all to be looking straight forward 
in pure profile, and to have their hair treated with the Grcck 
furrow' (letter to Charles Eliot Norton of 25 February 1884, 
Library Edition of Wo7ilef, xxxvii. 475). Nothing, however, 
seems to have come of this, Boehm being frantically 
overworked and Ruskin of uncertain mental health. 
Bochm's bronze portrait of Acland, dated 1887, is in the 
University Museum. 
12 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Domenico Brucciani and Company, I.ondon 
After Sir Joseph Edgar BOEHM (Josef 86hm) ( 1834-90) 
450. Thoroughbred gelding 
39 cms. (height including wire armature of ear); 
32.8 cms. (length of base); 11.3 cms. (width of base) 
Plaster. Solid cast. Seams from piece-mould unremoved. The tail 
partially broken, the ears broken off to expose wire armature, the 
fore legs chipped, the near one badly, exposing thicker wire armture. 
Scratched on the base of the plaster with bold angular capital letters: 
`D BRuCCIANI 8c Co LONDON 276.' Plaster now very dirty. 
Transferred from the basement store of the Department of 
Antiquities in 1986. Possibly residue of the teaching collection of 
the Ruskin School of Drawing. 
The firm of Brucciani were the leading suppliers of plaster 
casts in Ijondon in the last century (for a sketch of the firm's 
history see F. Haskell and N. Penny, L'¢7¢f¢.co „e//¢ f}o".a de/ 
gusto (T\iri]n. \984). L44-5). A Catalogtte Of Sculgture ky D. 
Brmcciani, 40 Russell St., Covent Garden, `indated but 
rectstcred in libraries in 1880, and so certainly published by 
then, includes an introduction drawing attention to a `New 
and Unique Collection of Animals by eminent Artists in Paris, 
8cc', including horses by `Monti, Fraton, Macarthy, Lady 
Dacre, Galnsborough, Mane [f¢.c], Rosa Bonheur' which arc 
then hsted on pp. 48-50. The line appears to have been a 
success and, after Boehm's death in 1890, the firm included 
casts after the highly successful bronze portraits of horses that 
hc had made popular with the English aristocracy. In the 
Catalogtte Of Casts fior Schools which the Board of Edttcation 
Co„f¢.de7tf S#¢.£4b4/G/or Scfroo/f, undated but issued by the fim 
previous to 1906, no. 276 (as also no. 275) was a horse by 
Boehm costing los. 6d. No. 276 was still on offer in the 
1914 catalogue. 
Perhaps by the factory in Soho, near Birmingham, of Matthew 
BOULTON ( 1728-1809) 
451 and 452. Pair of obelisks 
42.85 cms. (height); 8.85 cms. (length and width of plinths) 
The obelisks are composed of pieces of Derbyshire fluorspar (blue-john)-
the pedestals consisting of separate blocks, the tapering 
obelisks themselves of three pieces. The plinth, the leaf-moulding 
above it, the platform above the pedestal, the corner ornaments of 
acanthus, the two bands of guilloche ornament concealing the joins 
in the obelisks, the capping, and the cone finial are in each case 
composed of a separate clement of bronze, fire-gilded. The elements 
have been reassembled in this century in a manner that makes 
examination impossible. `Bouch Bequest 1963' is painted in black 
on the underside of each plinth. 
Bequeathed by Major T. Bouch, 1963. Received by the Museum 
on 20 November 1963. For more on the bequest see No. 469. Lent 
to the City Art Museum, Derby, on 27 May 1981. 
Neither the workmanship nor the design of these obelisks is 
of very high quality, but it is comparable with the more 
routine productions of Matthew Boulton's Soho factory (for 
which see No. 608). The separate pieces of fluorspar appear 
to have come from the same block for the same bands of dark 
mauve are in both cases continued through the different 
pieces. There is no mention in the Boulton archives of the 
production of obelisks at Soho but some are mentioned in 
carly sales and there are drawings in the pattern book; the 
latter do not correspond to these but Sir Nicholas Goodison 
regards the components as very close to Boulton's work and 
`would be inclined to think that the obelisks came from his 
factory' (letter of 19 June 1989). 
13
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably Gcorgc BULLOCK ( 1782/3-1818) 
After Gcrard Janscn and another 
453 and 454. Masks of shakespeare 
and an unbearded male, probably 
Wri||iam Wordsworth 
28.5 cms. (height of mask of shakespeare); 38.5 cms. (height of 
support for Shakespeare); 30.7 cms. (width of support for 
Shakespeare); 27.8 cms. (height of ?Wordsworth); 38.2 cms. 
(height of support for .>Wordsworth); 30.5 cms. (width of 
support for .>Wordsworth) 
Plaster of Paris discolourcd from ingrained dirt. There are scratches 
especially to the head of wordsworth (No. 454). The heads have 
bccn cast separately and stuck to the supports. There is an old break 
across the support for the Shakespeare mended with cement and a 
more recent break across the proper right top comer of the 
companion bust which has been mended with glue. Wire rings are 
attached to the backs of both supports. 
Provenance unrecorded but thcsc are perhaps the `plaster portrait 
reliefs of "Comtc Chambord" and "Tasso" ' included in an old 
typed list mostly of miniatures, headed `Portraits &c' in the `Mcd. 
Room' which was signed by E. T. heeds, Keeper of the Dcpartmcnt 
of Antiquities, on 12 March 1932. The T¢so was specified as the 
Sft of Mrs Stonehouse in 1915. It is more probably connected with 
`A plaster mask of the poet Wordsworth, taken from the life in 1815. 
Presented by Miss [ Elizabeth ] Wordsworth' ( RGPo77 a/ £¢c 4cGPGr a/ 
the Picture Galleries (+905). 8\). 
The cabinet maker and sculptor George Bullock was 
commissioned by the antiquarian John Britton to make a cast 
of the half-length effigy of shakespeare by Gcrard ]ansen in 
the Church of Holy Trinity, Stratford-upon-Avon, in 1814: 
the work was accomplished with some difficulty in Dcccmbcr 
of that year. A mezzotint by W. Ward ARA after the painting 
by Thomas Phillips RA after the cast by Bullock was pubhshcd 
on 23 April 1816 to celebrate the bicentenary of the poct's 
death. (An impression of this rare print is in the Hope 
Collection in the Ashmolcan Museum.) Casts survive in the 
Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, in the Soane Museum, and at 
Abbotsford. A cast in Shakespeare's Birthplace, Stratford-upon-
Avon, is of the head and shoulders only. (For these see 
Chive wdrr[wrigivl (ed.), George Bttlloch, Cabinet Maker 
(Ijondon,1988), mos.15, 67, 68, pp. 77-8,141-2.) This cast 
of the front of the head of shakespeare appears to be made 
from the sane mould: it is particularly close to that at 
Abbotsford although even more dull in its surface. There is 
another such mask in the National Portrait Gallery, I.ondon 
(in reserve, 185 A), framed and with the support painted 
black. It was presented by Albcrt Way FSA (d.1874). The 
identity of the other portrait has not been established for 
certain. It is likely to bc another eminent poet and bears a 
very slight resemblance to Milton (Spenccr might be 
suspected but he is always depicted with a beard). The best 
candidate is Wordsworth. It is known that a mask of 
Wordsworth supposedly taken from life in 1815 was presented 
to the Museum in 1905 (as mentioned above). This might 
have been made by Bullock, who is known to have been 
interested in finding modem companions for his Shakcspearc 
and cast the head of Sir Walter Scott for this reason. The high 
brow, prominent eyebrows, long straight nose, and spare hair 
parted near the centre all correspond with the portrait of 
Wordsworth painted by Boxan. If this is correct then it is 
curious that the companion mask of Shakespeare is not 
mentioned in the Museum's records. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Attributed to D. CARDOSI (active mid-ninctecnth century) 
After Franz Thaller and Matthias Ranson 
455. Bust portrait of Admiral Lord 
Nelson 
66.2 cms. (height including integral socle) 
Plaster of Paris. Hollow cast with very thin walls. The seams of the 
piece-mould are very evident. The thin shell of plaster is perforated 
below the proper left epaulette and on the top of the head to proper 
right. The plaster is discoloured with ingrained din but the face 
appears to have been dehibcrately coloured a golden brown, perhaps 
from a light coat of shellac applied only in this area. 
Provenance unrecorded. 
Nelson sat to the Austrian sculptor Franz Thaller when he 
was in Vienna in August and September 1800 at the same 
time that hc was being painted by Hcinrich Friedrich Ftiger. 
A life cast may also have been supplied to the sculptor. The 
completed marble bust, which is now in the National Maritime 
Museum, is inscribed `Franz Thaller ct Matthias Ranson 
Vicnnac Aust. MDCCCI' and was sent to I.ondon in that 
year. It was extensively copied and also served as the model 
for Flaxman's statue on the hero's tomb in St Paul's Cathedral. 
A bronzed plaster cast with the seams removed is in the 
National Portrait Gallery with the name D. Cardosi Scratched 
on the balck. (R. Walker. Regeney Portraits, National Portrait 
G¢//cry (Ilondon, 1985), i. 362, no. 2668, ii, pl. 2734). 
Vestidal seams on this plaster correspond with those which 
arc very evident on the Ashmolean bust. The size is the same, 
as is the soclc (which is square in the marble). Cardosi is 
likely to have been an Italian /o777¢¢}orG working in I.ondon. 
Hc is not othcrwisc recorded. The thin shell of the cast 
suggests a date in the second half of the ninctcenth century. 
15
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Sir Francis CHANTREY ( 1781-1841 ) 
456. Sketch model for a statue of 
Mrs Dorothy Jordan with her 
children 
31 cms. (height) 
Terracotta (possibly un fired clay) 
The University Gallery Donations Book records, in February 1863, 
the bequest of a `Miss Jones' consisting of copies made by her of 
Correggio, a 4¢jj.a-ri/G.ova of Queen Adelalde by Sir Francis Chantrey, 
and `a small sketch in clay for the statue of Mrs Jordan and her 
children'. The group has often been assumed to have been a part of 
the Chantrey gift of 1842. Miss Jones may well have been related 
to the sculptor's friend and biographer George Jones whose widow 
presented works to the University Galleries in April 1873. The 
sculpture was given an incorrect provenance in the catalogue of the 
chlkji:riron Sir Francis Cha!mrey 1781-1841: Sculptor of the Great 
(I.ondon, National Portrait Gallery, and Mappin Art Gallery, 
Sheffield,1981), no. 28. 
Very few sketch models survive by English sculptors of this 
period. This resembles, in colour of clay and summary 
handling, Chantrey's model for the Bishop Hcber monument 
(Victoria and Albert Museum, A. 29-1933). The completed 
marble, now in Buckingham Palace, represents Mrs Jordan 
with a different hairstyle, more ample drapery, and attributes 
of pipes and a mask by her feet to indicate her profession. She 
is also feeding an infant rather than carr)ing a sleeping one. 
Mrs Jordan, who had been the mistress of william, duke of 
Clarence, and had borne him ten children, died in poverty in 
Paris in 1816. The commission, the cost of 2,000 guineas, 
and the proposed location in Westminster Abbey were 
entered in the sculptor's ledger in 1831. Other sources enable 
us to be more exact about the date of the commission of this 
monument and also reveal the uncertainty concerning its 
location. 
A letter by Maria Edgeworth to her mother of 5 January 
1831 states that `the king has just sent for Chantrey and 
bespoken a monument for Mrs Jordan-to be put up where 
she died near Paris!' (M. Edgeworth, Lc#G7:t/yoow E"g/¢„d, 
JBJ3-44, ed. C. Colvin (Oxford,1971), 462). Chantrey 
rccaued how anxious the king was about the memorial and 
how concerned to hear his `opinion what it should be, & 
where it should be placed'|hantrey not being able to help 
much with the latter enquiry, the king `then went into a 
thousand particularitics of their private life, always ending 
that she had been an cxccuent mother to her children. He 
said he knew he had been much blamed for his conduct to 
her, but that from the time they parted he had allowed 
2,000 I a year, which was regularly paid cvcry quarter, 
although often with great difficulty to himself to find the 
mane+/' Uounals and Correspondence Of Miss Bell.ry, ed. La:dy 
Tcresa Lewis (Ijondon,1865), iii. 4634r-ntry for 25 July 
1839, recalling a conversation with the sculptor the previous 
evening). The marble group was completed in 1834 and, on 
the king's death, was inherited by the first earl of Munster, 
Mrs Jordan's eldest surviving son. 
16 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
CHELSEA factory 
457. Head of a lauching child 
19 cms. (height); 11.9 cms. (width across opening of neck); 
o.8 cms. ( approximate thickness of porcelain wall) 
Soft-paste porcelain, glazed and decorated with enamel colours. Pink 
orange is employed for lips and mouth, and the corners of the eyes, 
and also more funtly for the cheeks and elsewhere in the flesh. A 
lilac grey is employed for the hair (in hatched lines of varied intensity 
gving the impression of a tortoiseshell pattern), for the upper eyelids 
(each indicated with two fine Lines-the lower lids are unmarked), 
the irises, the eyebrows (rendered with fine hatched lines, slanting 
from upper right to lower left in both cases) and for the nostrils 
(very funtly). The decoration docs not follow the model exactly. 
The hair is indicated on the forehead where there is no relief and 
the numerous tiny teeth outlined in orange pink bcncath the upper 
lip arc not incised. There are grey peppery specks most evident in 
the neck and lower part of the cheek to proper left and in the highest 
part of the forehead. The unglazed body of the porcelain is evident 
on a few points and ridges of the curls. There is also a slightly 
granular texture in a few of the curls. The line across the proper 
right side of the face, accentuated by some of the pink orange being 
gathered on it, appears, from examination of the hollow interior, 
to bc a casting seam which has slightly opened in firing. There are 
also small firing cracks in the back of the head. There is an old break 
across the neck passing up into the hair which falls on the child's 
left shoulder, now accentuated by discoloured adhesive. Mounted 
on a mahogany stand: the origival soclc is hard to envisage. 
Placed on loan by Cyril da Costa Andrade of Morocco House, 
Bayards Cove, near Dartmouth, Devon in 1957. Given by him in 
1965 in honour of sir Winston Churchill. Registered on 25 January. 
From the collection of C. T. Fowler who is said to have discovered 
it shortly before August 1938 (when it was published in the 
Co~„oS.jfe#?-see below) `on top of an old coal bell with 
heterogeneous objects in a I.ondon shop'. For other gifts to the 
Museum from Cyril Andradc scc Nos. 487, 570, 5934. The head 
seems always to have been displayed by itself in a glass case on a side 
table in the company of British eighteenth-century paintings in the 
Chambers Hall Gallery. 
This radiant and vivacious head, known in no other ceramic 
example, is the most celebrated piece of porcelain in the 
Ashmolean Museum. It has always been regarded as an early 
product of the Chelsea factory: the distinctive colouring and 
handling of the decoration are characteristic of the factory in 
its early years (see for instance the orange lips and outlined 
tccth of the children with a fish flower holder, or the hatched 
rendering of the fur of the rabbit on the tureen, both in the 
Victoria and Albcrt Museum (c.196-1926 and Schr. I-151a) 
and the firing problems, evident in the speckling and the 
sean, are consistent with the experiments which the factory 
was making around 1750. The head was published, soon 
after its discovery, by Dr Bellany Gardner in Co""o¢.ffG#7 
(Aug. 1938: 59ndo-with a colour plate on the cover). Hc 
Was not content to identify it as Chelsea, but proposed that 
the model was by I.ouis-Francois Roubiliac, the great French 
sculptor who settled in I.ondon in the 1730s, and also 
Considered that `nothing' would be more `natural' than for 
it to be a portrait of Roubiliac's daughter Sophia, or Sophie, 
born in August 1744, whose godfather was Roubhiac's 
compatriot and fellow Huguenot Nicolas Sprimont, who 
managed the Chclsea factory. 
Roubhiac's givl angel in the monument to the duchess of 
Montagu is distinguished by a top knot in her hair: curls were 
not then enough to suggest femininity and there is no reason 
to suppose that this head is female. It would also bc surprising 
if it wcrc a portrait. And it is not certain that it is a child, 
Nevertheless Gardner's theory that it is a portrait of sophie 
won the support of Mrs Esdaile, then the leading expert on 
Roubiliac, and Andrade, the donor, was very strongiv 
attached to it (the Museum discouraged scepticism on the 
subject for this reason). That there is some association with 
Roubiliac is not impossible for he was said to have studied 
with Pcrmoser, whose style the head recalls, and hc is known 
to have studied and admired Bernini, from whose inventions 
the head is certainly derived. But there is no proof of Roubiliac 
working for the Chelsca factory and no close relationship 
between this head and any of his sculptures. 
It would seem to rcprcsent a novel departure in porcelain. 
Other children's heads of a similar size were made by 
European factories, but, it seems, only at a slightly later date: 
J. J. Kindler's animated and idcalizcd busts of Prince Ijouis 
Charles de Bourbon and his sister Princess Marie Zephirine 
seem to have been modeued for the Meisscn factory in about 
1753 and the pair of children's heads modelled by Franz 
Anton Bustehi at Nymphenburg date from 1760-1-their 
soclcs, incidentally, help us to envisage what was perhaps 
intended for this bust. A HG¢d a/a Bay after a model by 
Duqucsnoy made by the Chelsca factory in the same period 
as the Ashmolcan's head suggests an interest in sculptured 
models (Victoria and Albert Museum c. 34-1975). 
Bemini and Pemoser have already been mentioned as 
sources. There is a connection with the type of head that 
Bernini created in the mid-1640s for the angel administering 
intolerable pleasures to St Teresa in the shrine of that saint 
in S. Maria della Vittoria in Rome and then developed for the 
angel lifting Habalckuk by a lock of hair (in the Chid Chapel 
of s. Maria del Popolo, Rome, in the mid-1650s) and for the 
angels and cherubim in the glory above the Cathedra Petri 
in St Peter's ( 1657nd6). The porcelain head has the same 
dynamic mobility of expression and the same bold plasticity 
in the modelling of cheeks and mouth and eyes, and above 
all in the broad sweeping but pointed locks of hair. What is 
unlike Bemiri is the slanting of the eyes and the shght hint 
of the sublime and divine becoming grotesque and exotic 
which suggests the development of Bcrnini's style by Pcrmoser 
in whose work martyrs and harlequins, devils and Pekinese, 
are so closely auied. 
The origival model for the head is likely to have had a 
companion, responding to it in movcmcnt and 
complementing it in expression. Certainly the numerous 
plaster, terracotta, marble, and bronze versions of the head 
are frequently paired with a head of a crying child. None of 
the versions in these media that I have studied is likely to 
have been made before the late eighteenth century but they 
17
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
may all the same reflect prototypes which predate the 
porcelain version. (For bronze versions see Christie's, 
I.ondon, 9 April 1987, lot 116; also Co"»oS.ffc#y (Nov. 
1938), 276; Hcim Gallery, Summer Exhibition 1967, p.14, 
no. 30, attributed to Artus Quellinus the elder; and K. Corey 
Tbccbhe, European Bronz,es in the Royal Ontario Musettm 
(Toronto, 1982), no. 84, attributed to Artus Quellinus the 
younger.. 8. v . Gcitz-M6ha. Catalogtte Of Scttlpture in the 
L¢.e4¢.egho#f, F7i¢7¢4/#7¢, ii (Melsingen, 1988), n. 82; 
Sotheby's, New York, 9-10 January 1990, lot 102. ) 
Versions of the laughing child without a pair, dating from 
the eighteenth century and with clear British connections, do 
suggest that the porcelain version might not have had a pair. 
What appears to bc a plaster version of the laughing child 
appears, as Malcolm Baker has pointed out to me, in a painting 
of the late 1770s probably by J. H. Mortimer and representing 
Mortimer, Joseph Wilton, and a student. There is also a signed 
marble version of the laughing child by Nollekens in the 
Hermitage, Leningrad, also with no companion. 
As a pair the heads may have been meant for Heraclitus 
and Democritus, the cheerful and gloomy Greek 
philosophers. It is known that Thomas Regnaudin exhibited 
a pair of Ire-size plaster busts of the infant Heraclitus and 
the infant Dcmocritus at the Salon of 1673 (untraced) and a 
pair of bronze heads of the sane by Fran€ois Girardon are 
recorded as made for a friend at Troyes and arc likely to be 
those now in the Mus6e des Beaux-Arts in that city (F. 
Souchal. French Sculptors Of the 17th and l8th Centuries 
(Oxford,1981 ), ii. 734, nos.101 and 102). A pair of laughing 
and crying children can be seen on a side-table in Willcm van 
Haecht's painting of 1628 showing the gallery of Cornclis 
van der Geest (Rubens House, Antwerp) and a marble head 
in the Staatliche Museen, Berlin-Dahlcm, appears to be a 
version of the crying child of these two (Inv. 19/75). A 
bronze head of such a crying child is included in an opulent 
still life with emblems of vanity signed by Pieter Boel in 1663 
(Musec des Beaux Arts, Lille-see no. 8, p. 44, of lof; S¢.;c/e 
de R#Z7G"f (Grand Palais, Paris,1977-8) ). Some heads of 
children dating from the sixteenth century suggest that this 
theme was already popular then, although none seem to 
survive as pairs. (The grimacing bronze boy in the Pierpont 
Morgan Library is a notable cxamplc which could easily belong 
to this category. ) The idea of a pair of angels, one full of joy 
and the other of sorrow, can certainly be traced back at least 
to Michelangclo's plans for the tomb of Pope Julius 11 (as 
described in Condivi's Life). The most popular versions o.f 
this theme, however, arc relatively modern-the paired 
bronze heads of the Ashmolean type and, still more, the paired 
miniature bronze heads much reproduced in the last century 
as `Pleur et Rire' or `Jean qui pleur et Jean qui rit' which are 
supposed to derive from terracotta models by Houdon (`I.e 
Ris, I,e Chagrin et le d6dain', three `tetes de caractere en tcrre 
cuite' listed by the artist-but without reference to them 
being infantile models; see L. Reau, Ho#do7¢.. S¢ p¢.G Gf fo7¢ 
a7#p7.c (Paris, 1964), i. 94, in. 22, no. 55, and pl. XXIV). 
18 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
19
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
RIchard CHICHELEY (active 1720s and 1730s) 
458. Clock case crowned by a 
crowing cock and a figure of Time 
and flanked by boy angels 
29.7 cms. (height); 14.35 cms. (length at foliate feet); 10.5 cms. 
(width at foliate feet) 
Ijimcwood. The case is constructed in three parts. The figure of 
Time and his base slot into the top of the case. Both of Time's 
wings have been broken and glued at the point of contact with the 
back. Time's forelock and left and right hands have been broken 
off and are missing, as is the scythe which he wielded-xcept for 
the blade among the flowers by his right foot. The main body of the 
case consists of the central opening (with its old brass dial and iron 
hour hand), the cock, the flanking angels, the scrolls above and 
below their feet, and the shield with its elaborate monogram. Most 
of the raised right hand of the angel to proper left has been broken 
off and is lost, and so too has the emblem (presumably the moon) 
which he held aloft. The end of his right wing, also a flourish of 
drapery at his back, are broken off and lost. The other angel has lost 
his left wing and the ends of some of the points of his star. The 
four foliate feet into which the case of the clock is fitted fonn a 
separate unit. There arc traces of adhesive below it. Behind the base 
is a paper label printed `1836 Cat: p.' with ` 141 / No. 401.A.' added 
in black ink. On the flat back of the central body of the clock in black 
ink is written: `Museo Ashmoleano / Geordus Clarke 
LL:D: / 1736 / Ricardus Chicheley / Archisculptor 
Chathamensis/Navalis/Fecit'. 
Given by Gcorgc Clarkc in 1736 (see below). First recorded in print 
as `A model of st Peter's Clock at Rome; carved by Chicheley' in 
A Catalogtte of the Ashmolean Museum: Descriprion Of the Zoological 
Specimens, Arwiquities, Coins and Miscellaneous Cttriosities (Oxford, 
1836), 141, no. 401a. 
For Chichcley scc also No. 459. He was evidently a carver 
connected with the Royal Navy and with some official 
attachment to the dockyards at Chatham. Payments are 
recorded for hin and his partner Joseph Wade bctwecn 1726 
and 1728 for work on the pediment of the west middle front 
of Greenwich Palace-ccording to Gunnis who, however, 
in his entry for Wade records the partner's name as 
Bartholomew, rather than RIchard, Chicheley (R Gunnis, 
D¢.cf¢.o„¢vy a/B".£¢.£¢ Sc„/Pforf ( I.ondon, 1968 ), loo and 411 ). 
Gunnis also records payments for decorative stone carvings 
(capitals, modiLLions, flowers, and mask heads) in the south 
Pavilion of Quccn Anne's Court and over the chimney in the 
kitchen of the south-west Pavilion (ibid. loo). 
The clock has no resemblance to that on one end of the 
upper reSster of the fa€ade of the Basilica of st Pcter's in 
Rome but a connection with St Peter is suggested by the cock 
(although this is appropriate to clocks anyway) and it is not 
impossible that the clock is an illecttinate child of some 
Roman seventeenth-century invention. The monogram on 
the shield involves two Gs and two Cs and indicates the 
donor, Dr George Clarkc ( 1661-1736), `Fellow of All Souls, 
sometime burgess of the University, and one of Queen Anne's 
Commissioners for executing the office of I.ord High 
Admiral'. In 1719 he had given `a model of a fully rigged ship 
made by Williani Ijee' to the Museum. (See R F. Ovcnell, 
The Ashmolean Musettm 1683-1894 (Oxf;ord, \986), L\9, 
137). His interest in sculpture is suggested by the fact that 
be preseITted aL group o£ Sun§on slaying the Philistine after 
Giambologna to Brasenose Collcgc in 1727 (it was removed 
in 1881). Hc was the architect of the Warden's I.odgivg at 
All Souls of 1704nd, the Library of Christ Church (begun 
1717), and, in consultation with Hawksmorc, he designed 
the new buildings for Worcestcr Couegc in about 1720 and 
for Magdalen in about 1730. The beauties of carly eightccnth-century 
Oxford owe more to him than to any other man. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps Richard CHICHELEY (active 1720s and 1730s) 
459. Royal arms 
11 cms. (height excluding lion on crown); 14 cms. (width) 
Boxwood. There are small losses to the thinnest portions of the 
foliate scrolls below the lion's tail, to the unicorn's back left leg, 
and the scrolls behind it. The uppermost forward curled end of the 
acanthus has been broken off on both sides; that to proper left 
survives (and has been photographed in place). The lion finial to the 
helm has been broken off but survives (and has been photographed 
in place). There is a crack in the shield to proper left near the front 
left hoof of the unicorn. A metal chain is attached to the unicorn's 
collar. On the reverse of the carving there is a black-bordered paper 
label printed with `oN LOAN FROM' and `18 . . .', with `Ashmolean 
Museum / Oxford' written in brown ink, together with a smaller 
paper label printed `1836 Cat: p' with `141' and `No. 401' in ink. 
There are also traces of a pink paper label. Scaling wax was once 
attached behind the helm and behind the unicorn. 
22 
I'resumably the `hatchment of the Royal Arms, finely carved', given 
to the Museum by George Clarke in 1736. For Clarke see No. 458. 
First recorded in print as `The FGng's arms finely carved in wood by 
Chicheley 1736' in A C¢£#/og"c a/ £bc Aj¢7coo/e¢79 M#fc#7#.. 
Description of the Zoological Specimens, Antiquities, Coins and 
M;JCG//¢7¢Go#f C#r;ojG.f¢.cJ (Oxford, 1836), 141, no. 401. 
For Chicheley see the wooden clock case, No. 458. The 1836 
catalogue is not entirely trustworthy. 1736 is the date which 
is written on the wooden clock case, not on these arms. 
Perhaps the name of Chicheley slipped over from the clock 
case as well. It is easy to see how this carving would have been 
associated with the clock case, both being miniature carvings 
in wood, and it is easy to see how a tradition might have 
arisen that they were by the same hand. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Dora CIARKE (Dora Thacher Middleton, nee Clarke) 
(1895-1989) 
460. Coloured girl from 
Massachusetts 
31.2 cms. (height); 5 cms. (height of plinth); 16.5 cms. (length 
and width of plinth) 
Rosewood, carved and polished. There are a few very slight vertical 
splits. Mounted on a block of highly polished black slate. 
Sold by the artist probably in 1962 or soon afterwards to her friend 
orovida Pissarro by whom it was bequeathed to the Ashmolean 
Museum in 1968 together with two of her own paintings. Rcdstered 
in December (with no day given) as `Head of a native Woman. 
Wood'. 
Dora Clarke, although still alive when this catalogue was being 
compiled (she died 20 October 1989), was not able to help 
with the cataloguing of her work. She studied at the Slade 
School between 1910 and 1916. Some impressive finished 
drawings of factories in Detroit are dated 1917. An album of 
photographs of her sculpture commences with a marble low 
relief dated 1922. This work, entitled 777c /egg"d a/S¢p¢.fr¢., 
was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1923. She exhibited 
frequently at the Academy between 1924 and 1934, also in 
1938 and then in 1953, 1955, and 1959. During the 1950s 
she also exhibited frequently at the Royal Society of British 
Artists. During the 1920s and 1930s she enjoyed considerable 
success, both receiving portrait commissions and selling work 
to important collectors of advanced taste. 
Many of her works were of exotic subjects and were 
fashioncd out of exotic natural materials, most of them 
carved-but she did also work in copper and aluminium. Her 
slate group 8¢.4¢. N¢ Tofo of 1925 and her ebony K¢fe¢.owo"¢o 
g¢.71/ of 1928 were bequeathed by Miss Gertrude Watson to 
the Albright Knox Museum, Buffalo, New York, her Pr¢.»cGff 
Be"yw a/ LJg#„d¢ in Japanese wood of 1928 was sold to the 
Ijondon County Council, and her GG.71/ £4¢.#4¢.„g in RIsii stone 
of 1932 was purchased by Manchester City Art Gaucry. There 
is a gap in the album, and there was probably a sharp reduction 
in her work, bctwcen 1941 and 1951. 
In 1936 she married Gervase Middleton, later Admiral 
Middlcton CB, CBE. Some letters from her to Orovida 
Pissarro, preserved in the Pissarro archive of the Ashmolean 
Museum, describe her lack of enthusiasm for givng dinner 
parties for sea-lords and her severe migraines and depression. 
She rcccived special treatment in a Chicago hospital in 1947 
and seems to have had friends and relatives in the USA (hence 
perhaps the subject of the Ashmolcan's carving). Her father 
had been an American citizen. The Ashmolcan Museum's 
sculpture is included in the album as made in 1962 and sold 
to Orovida who may have already owned other sculptures by 
her: a photograph in the Pissarro archive of her home,13 
Redcliffe Gardens, I.ondon Swlo, taken in the mid-1950s 
includes the K¢.feey" g¢.71/ ( probably a work dating from the 
1920s) next to the telephone. 
The Coloured girl fivm Mac§achusett§ was ."ustratcd .\n 
Fcrelyth and Bill Wills's Sc#/¢f#7ic ¢.7¢ Wood (Newton Abbot, 
1975 ), a book which expounds the attitude to sculpture which 
Dora Clarke herself shared-shape, colour, and texture of 
the material suggesting form and subject-matter. Dora Clarke 
was still active as a sculptor when this book appeared: the 
ebony group 7ZJc /¢.ffg"Gr of 1975-7 is the last work in her 
album. Many pieces were removed without authority from 
her studio when she left to live in a nursing home. 
The album referred to above was acquired by the 
Dcpartmcnt of western Art in 1991, together with a portrait 
of Dora Clarke by Orovida. 
23
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Geoffiey CIARKE RA (b.1924) 
461. Angle and supported bar 
12.I cms. (height); 23.5 cms. (length); 7.5 cms. (width) 
Aluminium of a grey grade, the surface treated with silicone wax. 
Solid, sand-cast, in one piece by the artist at his workshop at Stowe 
Hill, Hartest. Stamped under the supported bar with `G C'-the 
first initial embracing the second-which encloses a diminutive `64'. 
`6/10' and `410' incised to either side of this mark, indicating the 
edition. 
From the collection of Christopher Hewett ( 1938-83). Given to 
the Museum by his family in June 1985 and included in the 
exhibition celebrating the gift which was held in the MCAlpine 
Gallery in January and February 1987 (no. 34-with marks 
catalogued incorrectly ). 
Another sculpture (No. 462) and a monotypc by Clarkc were 
also included in the ctft. Clarke had exhibited at Hewett's 
Taranman Gallery in 1975, 1976, and 1982. This piece was 
shown in the latter year but is dated `64' (i.c. 1964) and is 
related to A"g/G ¢"d j#4Po7¢¢d hay, a unique aluminium 
sculpture 20 inches high, 16 inches wide, and 36 inches long 
which was exhibited at the Redfcrn Gallery, 20 Cork Street, 
hondon, in L965 (Geo!ffiey Clarhe: Recent Scttl|itttres, r\o. 7 > 
illustrated). In the introduction to the catalogue for that 
exhibition J. P. Hodin writes of Clarke's sculptures as signs, 
and notes the inspiration of ideograms, Klee's paintings, 
Picasso's sculpture, and the `calligraphic' character of oriental 
bronzes. The aluminium retains some of the texture of the 
polystyrene from which the origival model was cut. 
24 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Geoffrey CIARKE RA (b.1924) 
462. Books 
18.75 cms. (height); 26.95 cms. (length); 6.3 cms. (width) 
Cast aluminium of a grey grade, the surface treated with sihicone 
wax, pohished on the three raised edges. Stamped on the lower right 
of the raised central rectangular relief area with `G C'-the first 
initial embracing the second-which encloses a diminutive `81'; the 
number 1 below. Two bolts are attached to the rear for hanging. 
Provenance-s with No. 461 (No. 35 in the 1987 exhibition). 
There may be a relationship with the twenty-two prints (in 
different media-copper engraving, dry-point, etching, and 
aquatint) made in homage to 7Z/c fb#Gc 4oofu, the etching by 
Hercules Seghers, by fifteen artists (including Henry Moore, 
Vieira da Silva, Ubac) for I,c I,¢.prg de /¢.p#Gf by Pierre Lecuire, 
published in Paris at the close of 1974 and first exhibited 
early in 1975 at Christophcr Hewett's Tararman Gauery. 
25
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
John CIARKE (died 1990) 
463. Cain and Abel 
109.2 cms. (height including integral plinth); 77.3 cms. (length 
of integral plinth); 39.5 cms. (width of integral plinth) 
Bronze with a dull dark grey to brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax, 
cast. `TOHN CIARKE' is chiselled in the chamfered side of the plinth 
to the right of the female figurc's right foot. 
Provenance unrecorded. The sculpture seems never to have been on 
public exhibition. 
John Clarke enjoyed little reputation as a sculptor. His name 
is in no reference books. The style, in particular the boldly 
scooped out and simphfied treatment of the heads influenced 
by Gauguin's `primitive' style of wood-carving, suggests a 
date in the 1920s or 1930s. It seems unlikely that the Museum 
could have bought or even have accepted as a gift such a 
26 
cumbersome work by a completely unknown artist without 
any record being made, but it is possible that it was placed 
on deposit and never retrieved. Although the figures are male 
and fcmalc the group is entitled `Cain and Abel' in a 
photograph album of works by Clarke brought into the 
Museum by Roger Warncr on 18 Scptcmber 1990. The 
caption to the photograph reads as follows `Malc and Female. 
The struggle between the positive and negative in nature. An 
allegory. Chebel (Abel) Conception, pains of birth. The Ego 
in conflict with matter, Having arrived at man and woman 
and not being interested outside its drama in the bloody 
murder in the Biblical story, I have preferred to dramatise 
the kind of murder we most of us commit when we push on 
one side a fine attribute in order to let one less fine flourish.' 
A photograph of the artist's home, the Malt House near 
Burford, taken in 1953, includes a plaster version of the 
group. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
S. E. COVELL (active 1810-12) 
464. Profile portrait allegedly of 
Baron Dominique Vivant Demon 
7.85 cms. (height of bust); 10.2 cms. (height of oval ground 
inside frame); 8.4 cms. (width of oval ground inside frame); 
17.1 cms. (height of board); 14.6 cms. (width of board) 
Wax, flesh-pink in colour, on a black ground, of paper or card, in 
the original oval gilt metal frame, mounted on a black wooden 
board. Incised in capital letters in the curve of the cut of the bust 
at the arm: `s. E. covELL 1810.' There is an old break from the bridge 
of the nose to the upper lip. 
Given by Sir Gilbert I.althwaite, GCMG, KCB, of 214 Ashlcy 
Gardens, I.ondon Swl, in 1964. Rcdstered on 16 July of that year. 
A card origivally pasted to the backboard of the franc carried 
a transcription in sepia ink by a mid-nineteenth-century 
French hand of a brief biography of Denon, 1747-1825, 
Director General of French Museuins under Napoleon and 
the cmpcror's art adviser. It mentions the 1829 edition of his 
Voyage days la haute et basse Egypee, so .rt "st ha:Ne been 
written after that date-considerably after the date of this 
portrait. Whilst the profile is not incompatible with other 
portraits of Dcnon, one may wonder whether it has not been 
confused with another portrait of a different date or whcthcr 
it was perhaps not made from the lfc, for 1810 was not a 
date at which one would expect to find an English artist in 
Paris obtaining a sitting from such a busy official. 
Furthermore, in the bronze statue of 1826 by Pierre Cartehier 
in the Cimctiere Pare Lachaise, Dcnon's head is not very 
silular. The term bust by Joseph Charles Marin exhibited at 
the Salon in 1827 (Ijouvre, c.c.179) is no closer. Four other 
wax portraits by Mrs Covell are listed in E. J. Pyke's 
B~i.ogr.Phi.c?lDictionaryOfWanModellers(Oxiold,r973), 
32. All of these arc of British sitters and those that are dated 
are of 1810 or 1812. A Miss Covell, painter, exhibited a 
portrait at the Royal Academy in 1810. 
27
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Associate of James COX (active from 1749; d. late 1791 or 
January 1792) 
465. Clock case supported by scrolls 
and fantastic fish and flanked by 
female personifications 
65 cms. (height); 33 cms. (length); 19.7 cms. (width); 19.2 cms. 
(diameter of main dial, including franc); 9.5 cms. (height of 
miniature painting); 6. 5 cms. (width of miniature painting) 
The movement strikes the hours and chimes the quarters on eight 
bells. The main enamel dial has two subsidiary ones above: proper 
right for regulation, proper left strike silent. `TA§ CoX / LONDON' is 
inscribed between the subsidiary dials. Engraved on the brass 
backplate: `Jamcs Cox. / Ik>ndon' in a frame of symmetrical rococo 
scrolls and tendrils. The glazed oval opening below the main dial 
contains a miniature gouache painting on vellum stretched over a 
copper plate. Rose silk was origivally visible through the pierced 
work of the sides of the case and behind the entangled ribbons and 
olive branches around the miniature. This material only survived in 
deteriorated fragments attached to a fabric glued in its place about 
thirty years ago: it was replaced in 1988. 
The case itself is of bronze, fire-dlt. The gilding is tarnished black 
in several places. The main body-onsisting of figures, scrolls, 
swags below the dial, and fish-was cast in one piece. Plugs are 
visible on the knee of the figure to proper left, also on her upper arm 
and her shoulder blade. There are several firing cracks, e.g. on the 
shoulder blade just mentioned. The acanthus leaves enriching the 
four principal scrolls are separately cast and bolted in place (that on 
the back leg, proper left, is now loose). The frame for the dials is 
also separately cast, as is that for the miniature which is embellished 
with the branches and ribbons-portion of these has been broken 
off and is rejoined by screws (the photograph of the detached frame 
has been taken without this), and other smaller parts have been 
reinforced by small plates screwed behind. The elements on top of 
the case-the lion, crown, shield, oval walsted socle and its finial-are 
all cast separately. The lion's left rear leg is cracked through and 
large plugs are easily discerned in his rump. His front left paw is 
attached by wire to the finial of the crown. 
Bequeathed by J. F. Mallctt in January 1947. Received in the 
Museum late May 1947. No.184 in the inventory of his collection 
where described as `A clock in English ormolu case, fomed by two 
female figures standing on dolphin feet' and valued at £360. Bought 
by Mallett at the sale of sir George Donaldson's collection, Puttick 
and Simpson, I.ondon, 6-10 July 1925, lot 328. Previously in the 
third part of the Hamilton Palace Sale, 3 July 1882, lot 884, fetching 
es61. Presumably acquired by the tenth duke of Hamilton ( 1767- 
1852 ) in the early nineteenth or, possibly, late eighteenth century. 
When in previous collections, and unth very recently in the 
Ashmolcan Museum, it was believed that this clock was made 
for Henry Benedict, cardinal of York ( 1725-1807), the `last 
of the Stuarts', who, on the death of his elder brother the 
Young Pretender, in 1788, styled himself Henry IX, king of 
England. This was on account of the Stuart arms on the 
shield which, since they have a crescent at the honour point 
and a prince's crown, must date from before 1788. When 
the case is examined from above (which is normally impossible ) 
and also in its interior it is clear that the crowning elements 
28 
have all been added-perhaps to give the clock an added 
attraction for the duke of Hamilton who was obsessively 
interested in royal finilies. The bolts and fixtures inside this 
part of the case are distinctive, improvised, and of more recent 
date than the others. Outside, the colour of the Slding, when 
sccn in a strong light, is not the same as that of the main 
body of the case. Above all, the oval waistcd socle behind the 
arins does not fit the top of the main case and fans to conceal 
the evidence of a former attachment to the front beside the 
raised hand of the figure proper left. Although the lion is as 
well modelled and tooled as any other part of the case the 
royal crown and the leaf capping on the socle behind it are 
thin, stamped, mass-produced ornaments. There is no room 
for a unicorn although one would certainly have been placed 
here had the clock been designed with the royal arms. 
The attribution in the Hamilton Palace sale of the miniature 
of dancing Bacchanals to `Degault' was modified by Mallett 
into `the manner of Degault' and accepted by the Museum 
in this form with Degault erroneously identified as `Picrre 
Marie Gault de Saint-Germain 1754-1842' (after Thieme-
Becker) instead of Jacques-Joseph de Gault or Degault 
( 1738-after 1812) (for whom, and for the confusion over 
names, see C. Jcannerat, `De Gault et Gault de Saint-
Gc;rmirn' , Bulletin de la Soci6t6 de lJhistoire de l'art frantais 
( 1935nd), 221-35). But the miniature is not in fact very close 
to work by this specialist in `le genre camee'. Degault did 
sometimes employ a black ground but his inspiration was 
taken from antique gems and cameos, whereas the action of 
the dancers recalls the murals discovered in 1749 at Torre 
dcll' Annuziata, Pompeii-specially the composition of the 
`duc Ballatrici'-murals which were much copied and 
imitated in gouache by artists in Naples and Rome such as 
Michelangelo Maestri. The modelling of the grey and cream 
stipple is as subtle as the tiny touches of pinky terracotta 
colour are telling in the wreath of flowers and the rattles of 
the castanet. Under magnification traces of gold are evident, 
especially in the fircone of the thyrsus. Grisaille painting of this 
sort of subject was not unfiniliar in England in the late 
eighteenth century (it is found on furniture, for example, the 
seasons painted in oval reserves in the corner commodes at 
the Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight (H 279) ), but no 
English artist worked in exactly this medium and mode with 
such extraordinary finesse. 
It is natural to suppose, as Mallctt did, that since the 
movement is English, or at least signed by James Cox of 
I.ondon, the ormolu would also be English. Such a point of 
view would bc reinforced by the fact that it is certainly not 
French. In French ormolu of the second half of the eighteenth 
century it would be most surprising to find such cracks and 
flaws-lso such rough and vigorous modelling and such 
exciting freedom in the tooling of the metal. In France such 
a work would also be cast in more pieces. Most obviously, 
the fish feet would be cast from the same moulds or pair of 
moulds (cf. No. 341 ), whereas here each is different and some 
are so distorted as to have only one eye. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
The branches and ribbons, the quatrefoil pattern of the 
pierced side panels, the neat swag below the main dial, and 
the leaf mouldings framing the dials are all possible in French 
design of the period in which Cox worked, but not the fish, 
the double clam sheus behind their linked tails, the bold 
scrolls, and the general balloon shape. The fish, shells, and 
scrolls derive directly from Bernini and the designer of this 
must surely have bccn an Itahan or an artist whose taste was 
formed in Italy where the work of Bernini and his school 
continued to be esteemed and imitated until the close of the 
eighteenth century. 
This blend of the baroque and nco-classicism is 
characteristic of Sir William Chambers ( an observation I owe 
to Charles Truman), especially if one considers his State 
Coach. However, the clocks actually made to his designs by 
Matthew Boulton's craftsmen are neat architectural pieces not 
vigorous sculptural ones. The figures are similar to those that 
one finds in the sculpture of Joseph Wilton (who sometimes 
collaborated with Chambers) and of Joseph Nollckens (who 
is known to have made a bust of Catherine the Great for 
James Cox). Against the idea that the case was made in 
Entland is the miniature (although this could have been 
imported), the absence of comparable English ormolu, and 
the existence of a porcelain clock in the Victoria and Albert 
Museum (3645 and 3645a-1856) obviously modelled on this 
one which is supposed by experts to be from an Italian factory 
(or, as John Mauett has proposed, from the Buen Retiro 
factory, Madrid, which had many links with Italy). 
James Cox, whose name appears on the clock, was 
established at the Golden Urn, Racquet Court, Fleet St, 
I.ondon, by 1749. By 1751 his rococo trade card was 
announcing in three languages that James Cox, `Goldsmith 
. . . makes great variety of curious work in gold, silver and 
other metals; also in amber, pearl, tortoiseshell and curious 
stones', and was also a dealer-`N.B. Buys gold, silver, curious 
stones, amber, jewels and curiosities'. He moved to Shoe 
Lane and formed a partnership with an Edward Grace 1756- 
9, but little otherwise is known of him before 1769 when he 
acquired the Chelsca porcelain factory fi.om Nicolas Sprimont. 
This hc sold, after a very short period, in 1770. In 1772 he 
opened a museum of his jewelled automata-flute-playing 
Chinamen and gemstone flies and flowers, and so on-at 
Spring Gardens, for which a descriptive catalogue was 
published, and in May of the following year a Bill was passed 
in Parliament enabling him to sell his `magnificent pieces of 
mechanism and jcwellery' by lottery. The catalogue for this 
also survives in the preface for which hc supplies a defence of 
luxury, claiming that his exports `havc brought more than 
half a million sterling to the port of I.ondon within the last 
seven years' and pointing out the `grcat number of artists 
and workmen he cmployed'. He was declared bankrupt in 
November 1778. Claire I.e Corbelher (in `James Cox: A 
Biographical Review', B#7i/z.7g;gro7£ A4l¢g¢zG.»c (June 1970 ), 
35lnd), from whom the above facts arc derived, points out 
the common stylistic denominators in the extant pieces which 
Cox is known to have supplied-hicfly miniature boxes and 
commodes with symmetrical rococo ornament in gold 
involving clockwork and jewels and hardstones-and they 
certainly have nothing in common with the clock in the 
Ashmolean. On the other hand Cox must have handled many 
items which were not in this `housc style' and the clock is on 
a different scale. There is evidence of Cox's interest in ormolu 
in larger works, a marble chimney-piece `inlald with ormolu' 
is described by William Hickcy, and Cox's acquisition of the 
Chelsea porcelain factory may have been associated with 
schemes for providing omolu mounts for porcelain (ibid. 
351-2). 
The ormolu clock, if made in England, would be likely to 
have been designed for export to a foreign court-Cox, as 
we have seen, emphasized his export business and he seems 
to have made his most remarkable automata as diplomatic 
Sfts for the merchant companies to present to exotic 
potentates, the Chinese emperor in particular. If taken or 
sent to Naples that would explain the miniature and it would 
also have been accessible there to designers of the Buen 
Retiro porcelain factory who might have been responsible for 
the clock now in the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
This porcelain version of the clock has, no subsidiary dials 
and no miniature. These differences however were no doubt 
conditioned by factors beyond the control of the designer 
who, in other rcspccts, tried to follow the ormolu example 
closely. There is good reason therefore to suppose that the 
stand for the porcelain clock with concave sides provides an 
accurate idea of one which was origivally a part of the ormolu 
clock, and also that the seated figure of Time on the top is 
copied from such a figure origivally crowning the ormolu 
clock. (The positions of Time's ovcrhangivg feet correspond 
with places on the top of the clock to which attachments were 
origivally made. ) As it stands at present the attitudes of the 
figures in the ormolu version make no sense, but in the 
porcelain version it is possible to see that they must have been 
holding, or at least indicating, attributes, or an attribute, just 
passed to, or taken from, Time. What was intended would 
be casicr to guess if we knew what the figures pcrsonificd. In 
the ormolu version there is a portion of a rudder with a bird's 
head terminal ornament peeping out beside the breast of the 
figure proper left ( something omitted in the porcelain 
version). This is an attribute commonly given to Fortune and 
sometimes to Abundance. And yet the seated figure of Time 
on the porcelain clock poses an additional problem. It is 
closely dcrivcd from a model, probably origivally designed as 
part of a group involving the Fates, piece-moulds of which 
survive in the Museum of the Ginori porcelain factory at 
Doccia. Documents show that Vincenzo Fogdni was paid to 
make waxes of this figure in 1725 and it was incorporated in 
the great allegorical ensemble alorifying the Medici made of 
Doccia porcelain in 1757 (K. Lankhcit, D;G 44lode//f¢7"7"/#"g 
her Porz,ellanmanuf aktttr Doccia (M:un!+ch, L982), +60, 
pl. 223, no. 87; also colour plate I). It had first been used as 
a gilt bronze figure crowning a clock of ebony and P¢.c£7ic d#rG 
now in the Bulgari Couection in Rome for which there are 
drawings by Giovanni-Battista Fogdni in the Uffizi dated to 
±7+3-18. (A. Gonz6lez-Pa+a[ctos,11 tempio delgttsto (In 
Toscana e l'Italia settantrionale), 2 vo\s. (M:flan, 1986), i. 44 
and ii, fig. 89.) 
29
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps Buen Rctiro factory, Porcelain Clock. 
Victoria and Albert Museum, I.ondon 
31
BRITISH SCULI'TURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
`G.C.D.' (dates unknown) 
466. Profile medallion bust portrait 
of Sammy Woods 
32 cms. (height); 28.5 cms, (width) 
Bronze with a dark brown dull patina. Sand cast. The reverse is 
hollow. The initials `G.C.D.' are chiselled to proper left beside the 
neck. There are four attachment points for bolts in the reverse which 
is painted with coarse capital letters in black `sAMMy / wooDs'. 
The bronze has been kept in the Hebcrdcn Coin Room as part of 
the vast collection, mostly of British medals, purchased from Colonel 
Michael H. Grant in 1953. The crude lettering is Grant's, but I 
have not traced this item in his manuscript catalogue. 
It is assumed that `G.C.D.' are the initials of the artist and 
that Sammy Woods is the name of the sitter. It has not been 
possible to identify a sculptor with these initials working in 
the 1920s or 1930s. He or she may well have been an 
amateur: the sculpture is certainly of poor quality and very 
poorly cast. 
The Hon. Anne Seymour DAMER ( 1748-1828) 
467. Bust portrait of prince Henry 
Lubomirski in the character of 
Bacchus 
54 cms. (height, including integral socle and plinth); 25 cms. 
(length of plinth); 23 cms. (width of plinth) 
Carrara marble. Intcgra.I base and plinth. Small chips; the corner of 
the plinth repaired with plaster. The following letters, on the side 
of the base to proper left, are chiselled with a distinctive drill-hole 
at the termination of each stroke: AIVIVA 2JEJA40PJZ / 
4£4A4EP / EJ70JE/ [Anne Seymour Damer fecit]. 
Transferred `on revocabledcposit' from the Bodleian hibrary in 
1897 (authorized by Convocation 16 February 1897; received by 
Museum 25 February). The bust was in the Bodleian Gallery 
according to James Dallaway in a footnote to his `Advertisement' 
[Preface] to the 1826 edition of Horace Walpolc's A„ccdofGf a/ 
P#¢.»f¢.„g ¢." E»g/¢„¢. Exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1788 as 
no. 607 (`Head of a boy in the character of Bacchus; marble'). An 
engraving in stipple by John Jones after a drawing by James Roberts 
was published by the same engraver and draftsman togcthcr on 26 
June 1790, the former with an Oxford address (Hogarth's Passage), 
apparently previous to its acquisition by the University. In the 1960s 
the bust was displayed in the Chambers Hall Room near the 
Nollekcns of Mrs Howard (No. 557). I.ong in reserve, it was placed 
in the Director's office in 1985. 
The Greek lettering on the marble is less pretentious than 
might be supposed, since Horace Walpolc noted of his 
protege that she `writes Ijatin like Pliny and is learning Greek 
. . .'. In addition, having been taught marble carving by John 
Bacon, she was introduced by another admirer, the 
connoisseur, collector, and Greek scholar Richard Paync 
Knight, to the principle that the ancient Greeks had always 
been responsible for the final execution of their work, in 
marble and bronze, as well as for the preliminary modelling, 
valuing the tooling which gave vitalty to the surface of the 
sculpture. Thus the Greek lettering may have a somewhat self-rightcous., 
even polemical, point. The marble is everywhere 
enlivened by traces of the rasp. 
Prince Henry ( 1777-1850), son of Duke )osef Lubomirski 
and Ludwika Sosnowskich of Poland, was adopted at the age 
of 6 by his wealthy, art-loving, and childless aunt, the Duchess 
Isabella Czartoryskich Lubomirska. Infatuated with his 
beauty, she paraded him in high society in several European 
cities and had him immortalLcd by many of the leading artists 
of the day. The prince was painted by Fricdrich-Hcinrich 
Ftigcr, Angelica Kauffmann, Grcuzc (three times-see the 
entry for lot 167 in the catalogue of Sotheby's New York sale 
4 June 1987), and Elizabeth Vigee-Lebrun (as Eros, in a 
painting now in the Staatliche Museen, Benin-Dahlcm), and 
was portrayed by Canova (also as Eros in a statue at Anglcsey 
Abbey near Cambridge and in another version at Lancut). 
Prince Henry and his aunt were in Ijondon between May 
and July 1787 and this would seem to have been the most 
likely date for the sittings for the bust portrait, although Mrs 
Damer could have travelled to Paris later in the year. (See M. 
Paskicwicz in %#2;G#% Po/j:leg.G ( 1977), 2/1 (VI), 23-31.) If, 
as was likely, Damer's marble bust formed part of Isabeua's 
collections it would have been removed by her to Lancut in 
1791. The prince bccanc first curator of the Ossolineum 
Institute in Lvov, a libray which also printed scholarly 
editions of the classics. This may wcu have involved him in an 
association with the Bodleian Library. 
MrsDanerwaspartialtoportraitureofthistype.HcrBoy 
¢f "G~c#ey was cxhibitcd at the Royal Academy in 1787 
(no. 625); she showed a C»G.% ¢f P¢z¢.I in 1788 along with 
this bust (no. 599); in the following year her 777¢/¢.a (no. 
585, National Portrait Ganery 4469) was in fact a portrait of 
the actress Etiza Farren; and her bust of Mrs Freeman as Isis 
ofc.1790(VictoriaandAlbertMuseun,A.31-1931)includes 
a sistnim on the soclc placed at an ande like the rty7J%J on 
Prince Hcnry's. Her work is not much varied and the blank 
expression, limited portion of the chest, frontal presentation, 
andinchiationoftheheadfoundinthisworkaretypicalof 
most of her portrait sculpture (the marble self-portrait 
presented to RIchard Paync REight and bequeathed to the 
British Museum togcthcr with his antique sculpture is 
cspeciallyclose).Somcofthcscformalcharacteristicsmayhave 
bcendcterminedbythcdisplayofthcbustsonhighchimneyL 
pieces. The observation of her fiend and admirer Thomas 
Hn=F_i.i.th=P.refac.eto_±s_Houscho|dFuini-;u=e--a;;V|`tLt-e%or 
DGcoz¢£¢.o»((London,1807),47)isalsorelevant:`theGrecian 
method of cutting the chest square, and placing its whole 
mass immediately on a tcm or other solid support-, seems 
muchpreferabletothemorcprcvalingoneoffinishingor 
roundingoffthatchest,andbalancingitscenteronlyona 
slender and tottering pivot'. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
James S. DEVILLE ( 1776-1846) 
468. Bust portrait of John Shute 
Duncan 
69 cms. (height) 
Plaster of Paris, painted yellow (not shellac and not absorbed by the 
plaster). Hollow cast in two parts: the socle is separately cast and 
attached. `|. DEVILLE F'r PUBD March 18 1825' is incised in the model 
across the back of the bust above the hollow. `TOHN SHUTE DUNCAN. 
M.A. / KEEPER oF ASHMOLE'S MUSEUM / died 1844' is painted in 
black in the hollow of the soclc. A portion of the back of the socle 
to proper right has been broken off and lost. 
Presumably presented to the Ashmolean Museum in the mid-nineteenth 
century. Possibly once in the Radcliffe Camera. 
John Shute Duncan ( 1769-1844) was unanimously elected 
Keeper of the Ashmolcan on 17 November 1823. He 
undertook a thorough reorganization of the Museum, 
initiating building work, extensive redccoration, relabelling, 
cleaning, and conservation: the Eskimo dresses wcrc washed 
and the crocodiles varnishcd. Many new benefactions were 
elicited by him and hc himself gave numerous zooloScal 
specimens to the Museum. When he married in 1829 he 
resigned the Keepership. He was awarded an Hon. DCL in 
the following year. By then his brother Phihp Bury Duncan 
had been elected as his successor (R. F. Ovencll, T%e 
j4j¢owo/e¢" M#JG#ow J683-1894 (Oxford, 1986), 189-98). 
Deviue was a plaster figure maker of Newport Strcct, Soho. 
He had acted as an assistant to Nollekens and purchased that 
artist's moulds. He also practised as an origival sculptor. The 
GG"#/Gow¢~'J M¢g¢2;¢.„e, noting his death ( 1846, 2: 104) 
described him as a `lamp manufacturcr' and a `phrcnoloSst' 
as well-the lamps were doubtless cast plaster figures holding 
lampsandthephrenologywasperhapsconnectedwithmaking 
casts of heads. It may be that Duncan came into contact with 
Devi]1e because of some casts (including the APo/Zo BG/pcde7iG 
and the D;Jcofo/#f) which he and his brother presented to 
the Bddcliffe Camera (Ovencll, op. cit. 189). According to R 
Gunnis, Dictionary Of ` British Sculptors (.London, +968), \30.. 
a bust of Duncan by Deville was in the Radcliffe Camera, and 
a it may be that this bust was origivally there. 
34 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Sir William Reid DICK Kcvo, RA ( 1879-1961 ) 
469. Crouching female nude 
23.2 cms. (height); 13.3 cms. (length of base) 
Chalk. Incised on the rock base `W. Reid Dick/ 1916 / Cabaret 
Rouge / Souchez' with a scparatc label `Carved out of Chalk / in 
the Trenches of/ the Vimy RIdge / 1916 / By W. Reid Dick'. 
Bequeathed by Major Thomas Bouch, Master of the Bclvoir Hunt. 
Bouch, who had been an undergraduate at Magdalen 1901-3, died 
on I May 1963. In his will, communicated by his solicitors on 13 
May, he wrote of his desire to bequeath to Oxford University his 
I.abrador quartz specimen table and `also my nude female figure 
carved by Reid Dick out of the chalk of the trenches of the Vimy 
RIdge in World War 1914-18 when he himself was in the second 
reserve line of trenches. He told me he persuaded a boy in the 
Kensington Regiment to pose for him.' Bouch also wanted Oxford 
to have `all my pictures or such of them as the Directors of the 
Museum may select'. Some of the paintings were accepted and 
others were sold to establish an acquisitions fund. On the 
Department's copy of the probate inventory of Ashome, Warwicks., 
Major Bouch's home, the chalk figure is mentioned by Robertson 
as something the deceased had particularly wished to be preserved. 
Oddly, and no doubt in error, it is not listed on the receipt of 20 
November 1963. 
The story of the boy model mentioned by Bouch in his will 
is peculiar. He must have had the most astonishing hips and 
buttocks. Another model may have been found in the 
mysterious `Cabaret Rouge'. The inspiration is obviously the 
fcmalcs in similar postures in the work of Rodin. 
35
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably foundry of Alessandro Parlanti, Parson's Green, 
Fulham 
After Sir Wihiam Reid DICK Kcvo, RA ( 1879-1961) 
470. The Catapult 
31.25 cms. (height of bronze); 2. I cms. (height of plinth); 
11.10 cms. (length of plinth); 7. I cms. (width of plinth) 
Bronze with a dark green-brown patina tending to a warmer brown 
at the naturalistic base. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. Incised `W. Reid 
Dick' in the model on a projection at the back of the naturalistic 
base to proper left of the boy's left foot. Bolted to a plinth of Siena 
yellow marble with mauve and white veins. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R. Brocklcbank in November 1926. 
No.16 on Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927 as `Nude boy 
drawing a catapult'. 
The figure was exhibited by Reid Dick at the Royal Academy 
in 1911 as a bronze statuette about 2 ft tall. This cast is now 
in Bradford City Art Gallery and Museum, Cartwright Hall, 
and other casts this size exist (one was in a private collection 
in Oxford). Half-size casts such as this example are abundant 
and arc often mounted on similar Siena yellow marble plinths, 
with slightly rounded corners, as in this case. Praised by H. 
Granville Fell in his little book on the artist as `a well-balanced, 
tense figure, precise in modelling and displaying assured 
scholarship throughout' (RG¢.¢ D;cfe (Ijondon,1945), pl. 2), 
it recalls elements of both the two most famous of Leighton's 
sculptures (Nos. 532-3). 
The founder of most casts of the C¢£¢P#/£ was John 
(Giovanni) Gahzia. He came to England from Sicily in 1912 
and worked for Parlanti where he became foreman. Like his 
Italian contemporaries Mancini and Giovanni Fiorini, who 
were also employed by Parlanti, he then started his own 
business. After a partnership with Fiorini in the Peterborough 
Road, Chelsea, during the 1920s, Galizia opened a foundry 
at 36 York Road, Battersea, in October 1930. By the time of 
his death in 1958 the foundry had moved to Chatfield Road, 
Battersea, where his son was still managivg it in 1988. 
Galizia's contract book (which his son kindly showed me) 
records an order for 3 C¢£#P%/£J on 2 June 1933 at 20 
guineas, another for 3 on 20 December at £21 10s., another 
for 2 on 6 October 1945 at £15 each, then one for I `large 
catapult' at fl5 on 14 December 1945, one for 2 small 
C¢£#P„/£f at fl5 each on 9 July 1946, one for two large and 
two small C¢}ap#/£f (at £30 and £20 each) on 18 June 1947, 
and lastly one for two small C¢£ap„/£r at £20 each on 30 
June 1948. All these orders seem to have been placed by the 
sculptor. In addition one cast of the larger version was 
commissioned for £40 by Ijady Dick on 21 March 1965. The 
contract book reveals that Dick gave Galizia much 
employment, preferring to use his foundry for all his smaller 
work in bronze. Yet the Ashmolean's cast cannot have been 
cast by Galizia's foundry, since it dates from before 1927. It 
is likely that Dick employed Galizia because he had formerly 
employed Parlanti and was aware of his work at that foundry. 
36 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Fran€ois DIEUSSART ( c.1600ndl ) 
471. Bust portrait of prince Rupert 
71.8 cms. (height of bust); 18.4 cms. (height of socle); 26 cms. 
(length of socle); 21.6 cms. (width of socle) 
Carrara marble, severely weathered, battered, and soiled. The nose 
is restored in plaster. There are many minor losses: e.g. portions of 
the lace collar on proper left side, a curl above the centre of the 
forehead, a curl at the proper left shoulder. Much detal is almost 
worn away: e.g. ornamental fringe of cloak to proper left, little bow 
at centre of the lace collar. The proper left side of the bust has been 
detached and refixed and may always have been pieced. Mounted 
on its original socle of rectangular plan modified with a segmental 
projection in front; the sides hollowed to balance the projection. 
`ROBERrvus / DEI G . cOMEs / PAL . RHEN . / Dux BAVAR . / AETA . i7 
AN.1637' is chiselled on the curved front face of the socle. 
Given to the University by the dowager countess of Pomfret in 
1755. Acquired by her father-in-law, Sir William Fermor (later I.ord 
Leicester) from the sixth duke of Norfolk in 1691 together with the 
Arundel marbles collected by Thomas Howard, second earl of 
Arundel. This bust must have been commissioned by, or presented 
to, the second earl. It was exhibited in the Old Schools together 
with the other Arundel marbles and is visible on a shelf together 
with the bust of Henry VIII (No. 599) at one end of the gallery in 
the drawing by William Westall dated 1813. 
Prince Rupcrt and his brother Charles-I.ouis were in England 
1635-7 to try to persuade their uncle, King Charles I, to 
support their claims to the Palatinate. The earl of Anindel's 
embassy in 1636 to the Holy Roman Emperor on the king's 
behalf and in this cause may be connected with the existence 
of this bust and its pair (also dated 1637, with identical soclc 
but in superior condition) at Arundel Castle, Sussex. An earlier 
bust of the king himself, dated 1636, is also at Arundel Castle. 
This suggests that Arundel was a patron of Dieussart from 
the commencement of the sculptor's residence in this 
country, for he is first recorded as working here in that year, 
making a `Paradise of Glory' for the Queen's Chapel. Anlndel 
may indeed have encouraged hin to come to England from 
Rome where he had been employed by the Barberini-see 
D. Howarth, Lord Arttndel and his Circle (INow Haven, 
Conn., and I.ondon, 1985), 161 ff. 
37
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Fran¢ois DIEUSSART ( c.1600ndl ) 
472. Bust portrait of Thomas 
Howard, earl of Anmdel 
90.2 cms. (height of bust); 24.8 cms. (height of socle) 
Carrara marble, severely weathered, battered, and soiled. Ths bust 
was dragged carlicr in this century from a burning house and lay 
for a while neglected and dirty in an outhouse where, however, Sir 
Oliver Millar detected it and recommcndcd its rc-erection. The 
nose was then repaired, but the missing right shoulder was not 
rcplaccd. The clean break here and the character of the hollowed 
back of the bust suggests that Dieussart must have used a scparatc 
block of marble for this area (as may also have been the case with 
No. 471). The bust was cleaned in part and extensively restored on 
acquisition by Kathleen Kimber of the Department of Antiquities 
working under the direction of Mark Norman. Mrs Kimber built up 
the proper left shoulder, the proper right eyebrow, the front of the 
collar, and the lower portions of the cloak folds across the chest and 
also devised a talbot to match the lion supporter in the socle and 
completed the broken head of the horse projeedng at the front of 
the socle through the c¢rfz//;"a to match those to either side. 
Mounted on the massive white baluster-shaped pedestal origivally 
38 
devised for the bust of Cromwell (see No. 558). For a photograph 
of the bust as it was previous to Mrs Kimber's work see the exhibition 
Thomas Howard Earl Of Arundel cked below. p. \3. 
Bought from Mr and Mrs Neville Howard of Greystokc Castle in 
January 1987 for £50,000 with contributions: £25,000 from the 
Regivnal Fund administered by the Victoria and Albert Museum, 
£12,500 from the National Art-Collections Fund, £10,000 from 
the Central Purchasing Fund, and ca,500 from the Blakiston Fund. 
The National Art-Collections Fund made its contribution in 
memory of sir Ellis Waterhouse. The bust had never left the Museum 
since being loaned to the exhibition 777oow¢f Hoty¢7i¢ E¢#/ a/ 
47i¢¢"de/ in 1985. It was crectcd, after restoration, in the central 
niche at the head of the staircase in December 1987, replacing the 
statue of Judith (No. 473). It had always been in the Howard finily 
and was presumably made for the sitter; it was probably taken to 
Greystoke in the eighteenth century. 
For Dicussart's career in England see Nos. 471 and 473. The 
portrait, one of the most ambitious bust sculptures executed 
in Britain in the seventeenth century, may well have been 
intended for Anmdel House and have prcsidcd over the great 
collections assembled by the earl there, including the ancient 
marbles, many of which are now in the Ashmolean Museum. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps by Fran€ois DIEUSSART ( c.1600ndl ) 
473. Judith with the head of 
Holofemes 
136.5 cms. (height including the portion of the integral marble 
base proud of the `capital' of the pedestal); 38.5 cms. (width of 
marble base) 
Canara marble, severely weathered and battered. Cleaned July 1988 
by Kathlecn Kimber, using the steam method. The plaster 
restorations were renewed at the same date. The chief of these is 
part of the loop of fringed drapery to the figurc's left where it 
touches the figurc's skirt. The small toe of Judith's left foot is broken 
off, the toe next to it chipped. Her right arm is broken at the sleeve. 
It would have made contact with the skirt again, presumably at the 
wrist, and would have probably held a sword. A loss on the skirt 
indicates this point of contact. A loop of drapery above her left 
brca§t would presumably have been fastened to the jewel to match 
that above her right breast. Mounted on a pedestal with a p¢.Gfrfz 
fG#G#¢ `capital' and plinth; the integral base of the marble figure has 
been sunk and cemented into the `capital'. 
`Found in the basement' in 1934 (by K. T. Packer). Given to the 
University by the dowager countess of Pomfret in 1755. Recorded 
by George Vertue as among the `Anindel Marbles'. Presumably 
made for, or acquired by, the earl of Arundel in the seventeenth 
century. Placed by Parker on the present pedestal, which was adapted 
for the statue by Helen Munro and Robert Goodcn, and in the 
principal iiiche at the head of the main staircase (replacing the bust 
of woodbum-see No. 448). Moved in November 1987 to the 
Randolph Gallery. Given an accession number by the Department 
of Antiquities in 1988 (G. 1277, and G. 1278 for the `altar'-i.e. 
the pedestal. ) 
As Parker was the first to notice, there is a related bronze 
statuette,18.5 cms. high, in Berlin (now Staatliche Museen, 
Benin-Dahlem, no.1816). Jacob Hess, publishing this in 
r967 (Kunstgeschichtliche Studien in Renaissance and 
B¢7ioc4, ii (Rome, 1967), 161, pls. 13-14), pointed to 
similarities with Nicolas Cordier's P7'r¢¢de#cG in the 
Aldobrandini Chapel and Berthclot's angels in the Borghese 
Chapel in Rome. Sylvia Pressouyre questioned this and 
suggcstcd that the Berlin bronze looks like a 4oz2;G#o for the 
Ashmolcan J#d¢.£4 rather than a replica of it. ( Bo2;2##¢., 
however, were not commonly made in bronze.) She 
recommends that the sculptor of the statue and of the 
4o2;2;c#o-she assumed that they arc the same-bc scarchcd 
for `among the Ijombard and Venetian sculptors of whom 
there wcrc so many active in Rome in the early sevcntecnth 
c;enrur!/' (Nicolas Cordier: Recherches sur la sculpture d Rome 
¢#£o#r de j600, 2 vols. (Rome, 1984), ii, fig. 252, no. 65, 
pp.444-5). 
More recently, Charles Avcry has suggested that the 
Ashmolean's marble is the work of Francois Dieussart (see 
the catalogue for the sale of T77G Ar##de/ 44l¢„b/cf ¢„d O£¢Gr 
Sculpture f tom Favley Cottrt and Hall Barn, Chisirc. s, 
I.ondon, 10 December 1985, p.16, discussing fragmentary 
torsos from the Arundcl Collection which are neither Roman 
nor Greek antiquities). The attribution is attractive not least 
40 
because the sculpture could thus have been made in England 
which is inherently more likely than that it was imported. 
Avery recommends comparison with the Mother and Child 
group on the monument to Charles Morgan, Governor of 
Bergen op Zoom, in the latter city, but this comparison is 
not easy to make (scc, however, C. Avery, `Fran€ois Dicussart: 
Portrait Sculptor to the Courts of Northern Europe', S£"¢¢.er 
¢.„ E#ropG¢7¢ Sc„/Pf#rc (London,1981 ), 219-20). Dieussart's 
bust of Johanna Doff of c.1645-50 in the Rijksmuscum (I. 
Leouwchoc;I8, Beeldhouwkunst in bet Rijksmusettm 
(Amsterdam, 1973), no. 257b) certainly provides analoSes 
for the drilling of the hair and for the character of the fringe, 
whilst the treatment of the jewel may be matched with that 
in Dicussart's bust of Queen Henrictta Maria (Avery, op. cit„ 
pl. 5). But this is not conclusive. The bronze statuette may 
well have been an independent invention which inspired 
Dieussart for it is a more sophisticated figure than the stiff 
and uneasy statue. It is very freely modelled and the cast 
appears to be untooled. Records in Berlin indicate that it was 
bought in I.ondon in 1890. 
The pedestal upon which the marble figure has bccn 
mounted is probably Italian work of the early sixteenth 
century and will be catalogued in another volume. The base 
of the marble seems likely to have been cut down since its 
form-ircular in front but following the line of the drapery 
behind-is most peculiar. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S 
NAMEdiLf.
1:H¥['#¥±
se=* 
RE,i,:i.,1,;,",i..";;,:,,,`+,I, 
Judith with the head of Holofcrncs. 
Staatliche Musccn, Berlin-Dahlcm 
41
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
An Bronze Foundry, I.ondon 
After John DOUBLEDAY (b.1947) 
474. Sir Maurice Bowra 
44.2 cms. (height of bronze); 5.2 cms. (height of mahogany 
plinth); 22.7 cms. (length of same); 22 cms. (width of sane) 
Bronze with a pale green and golden brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax 
cast (the chair, however, is solid). Incised `Doubleday' in the 
model on the chair rail to proper right. The bronze is bolted to an 
unmoulded mahogany plinth. 
Presented by Sir William Yatcs in 1975. Registered on 22 July. 
The bronze is a maquette for the sculpture of Sir Maurice 
Bowra ( 1898-1971 ), the Master of wadham, now in the 
garden of wadham-Bowra's wit was proverbial among 
Oxford dons. Mr Doubleday informs me that his sculpture 
was intended to show how Bowra and the `fabric' had become 
one-`the fabric in this case being represented by his study 
chair'. Some people regarded this as `an infantile pun', but 
`Bowra was a bit of wadham or the other way round, so 
that's how I represented him'. Doubleday believes that the 
maquette was unique, but an earlier version of the idea exists 
in an edition of two of which he retains one. 
Among other public sculptures by Doubleday are portraits 
of Dr Michael Ramsay, Archbishop of Canterbury, at 
Lambeth Palace ( 1974), the statue of Charlie Chaplin in 
Leicester Square, I.ondon ( 1981 ), the statue of the Beatles 
in Liverpool ( 1984), the statue of sir Laurence Ohivier in the 
National Institute of Film and Drama in Beijing in the 
People's Republic of China ( 1987) . 
42 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknown foundy 
After Conrad DRESSLER ( 1856-1940) 
475. Portrait bust in relief of John 
Ruskin 
15.9 cms. (height); 20 cms. (diameter of board) 
Bronze with a dark brown patina worn to yellow on the nose. Heavy 
sand-cast, open behind. Mounted on a circular board of pine. 
Incised `Con . . ' to proper left inside the jacket lapel. The board 
coarsely inscribed in black paint on verso: `J° Ruskin / By / C. 
Dressler'. 
The coarse inscription indicates that this item although stored in the 
Deparment of western Art must belong to the collection of medals 
purchased from Colonel Michael H. Grant in 1953 for the Heberden 
Coin Room. 
Dressler stayed with Ruskin at Coniston in 1886. Ruskin did 
much to encourage him and in particular to direct his 
sculptural training towards the applied arts. In the late l880s 
hc was working on the portrait of Dean hiddell for Christ 
Church and the Ancastcr stone figure of A4:¢ry A4l¢g7d¢/G» for 
Magdalen College, Oxford. The terracotta bust of Ruskin by 
Dresslcr in the Tate Gallery was probably the one exhibited 
at the Royal Academy in 1885 (as no. 2009) and at the New 
Gallery in 1888 (as no. 320). It is reproduced in the A4l¢g#z;¢."c 
a/A77for 1891. A bronze bust said to be ofdiffcrent character, 
dated 1903, was presented to the Ruskin Memorial Hall, 
Bournville. It is probably identical with the one reproduced 
opposite page 374 as a supplement to the March 1901 issue 
of the A7¢¢.j}. It is likely that the Ashmolean's bronze was not 
originally conccivcd as a high rclicf but in the round. Indccd 
it appears to be an identical cast to that reproduced in the 
A77¢.ff but sawn down, perhaps bccausc of a flaw in the cast. 
It is so simplified in comparison with the earlier terracotta 
and so dull in surface that one must wonder what part Dresslcr 
played in its creation, for his best work is very sensitive, 
indccd over nervous, in texture, and during the l890s he 
experimented with lost-wax casting in his own small foundry 
(-M. H. Sp;id"n:n, British Scul2ture and Sculptors Of To-Day 
(Ik)ndon,1901), 86). For Drcsslcr see also Nos. 476-7.
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Conrad DRESSLER ( 1856-1940) 
476. Profile portrait medallion of 
Sir John Mowbray 
20 cms. (dianetcr) 
Plaster cast. Incised in the model: `CoNRAD DRESSLER 1882' below 
the bust and `SIR JOHN MoWBRAy / MDCCCLXXXII' behind the 
neck. The frame, brilliantly ctlded, is also of plaster and integral. 
Frame chipped below. Mounted in a shadow box. 
Provenance recorded 
Drcsslcr seems to have cxhibitcd this portrait at the Royal 
Academy in 1889 (as no. 2031, fife Rf. Ho„. S¢.r/o4» 
A4low47ey. 8¢77., A41.P.), but perhaps in another medium. 
Mowbray ( 1815-99) was Conservative Member of 
Parliament for the University of Oxford from 1868 until his 
death. He was an Honorary Student of Christ Church, his 
college as an undergraduate, and had in 1836 been President 
of the Oxford University Debating Society. There is a similar 
plaster profile medallion by Drcssler of spenccr Horatio 
Walpole dated 1882 in the National Portrait Gallery (5215). 
For Drcssler see also Nos. 475, 477-9. 
44 
After Conrad DRESSLER ( 1856-1940) 
477. Medallion profile bust portrait 
of Benjamin Disraeli, lst earl of 
Beaconsfield 
19 cms. (diameter of medallion visible within fromc); 20.6 cms. 
(probable diameter of medallion ); 23.9 cms. (diameter of frame) 
Copper electrotype. The metal remains furly bright. `coNRAD 
DRESSLER' is incised on the cutting of the bust. The relief is set in 
an ebonizcd pine frame. On the wooden backing to the frame `I.ord 
Beaconsfield / By / Courad Dressler' is written in pen and ink and 
`wlTH 18 / 6 / 30 / Cast of .... DI-to hay' is written in pencil. 
The elcctrotype is kept in the Coin Room as part of the collection 
of medals purchased from Colonel Michael H. Grant in 1953. It is 
included in his manuscript catalogue on p.140 as one of the two 
(see also No. 478) of 1880 and 1881. 
For Dresslcr scc also Nos. 475-7, 478-9. This electrotypc 
(or at least the original which it reproduces) was evidently a 
companion of that of Gladstonc which is of identical size and 
has the same tcxturcd ground. For a bronze version of the 
portrait see No. 478. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
After Conrad DRESSLER ( 1856-1940) 
478. Medallion profile bust portrait 
of Benjamin Disraeli, 1st earl of 
Beaconsfield 
28.7 cms. (diameter of medallion); 20 cms. (height of bust) 
Bronze with a dark brown patina. Sand-cast. Hollow behind the 
bust. `CoNRAD DRESSLER'/ `18 Ap 1880' incised funtly in the model 
under the cutting of the shoulder. 
The bronze has been kept in the room of the Muscum's administrator 
since c.1970. It came from the Heberden Coin Room whcrc it 
formed part of the collection of medals purchased from Colonel 
Michael H. Grant in 1953. It is included in the manuscript catalogue 
of his collection on p.140 as one of two such medals of 1880 and 
1881. 
The faintness of the signature makes it possible that the cast 
was not authorized. See No. 477 for another version of this 
portrait. 
After Conrad DRESSLER ( 1856-1940) 
479. Medallion profile bust portrait 
of William Ewart Gladstone 
19.5 cms. (diameter of medalhion visible within frame); 20.6 cms. 
(probable diameter of medallion); 25. 5 cms. (diameter of frame) 
Copper electrotype. The metal has darkened. `Published .... 
8 / I.ondon .... 28th 1880 / CONRAD D .... ' in fundy incised 
letters can be read on the cutting of the bust. The relief is set in an 
ebonized pine frame with a split at 6.30 and a chip missing at the 
right edge. On the wooden backing to the frame 
`By / Conrad / Drcssler' is crudely painted in black. 
The electrotype is kept in the Heberden Coin Room as part of the 
collection of medals purchased in 1953 from Colonel Michael H. 
Grant. It is dated 1881 in Grant's MS catalogue (p.142). 
For Dressier see also Nos. 475-9. It is not known whether 
the making of this electrotype was authorized. If it was it is 
strange that the inscription is not clearly ledble. The lettering 
especially suggests that the electrotype was made from a cast 
taken from a plaster or bronze version of the medauion. 
45
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
[Edward] Alfred [Briscoe] DRURY ( 1856-1944) 
480. Tile decorated with lhies of the 
valley 
22.2 cms. (height); 20.7 cms. (width); 3.4 cms. (thickness) 
Artificial or `composition' stone with a colour and texture resembling 
hillstonc grit. `A: DRURy Nov/ 25th / 1875' scratched after firing on 
one side. 
Provenance unknown. 
The date would suggest that Drury, whose father was a tailor 
who had settled in Oxford, made this at the Oxford School 
of Art where he studied after he left New College Choir 
School presumably in about 1870 and previous to winning a 
place as a National Scholar at the National Art Training 
School, South Kensington (later to be named the Royal 
College of Art), presumably in about 1876-neither the Choir 
School nor the Training School retains records. There is 
nothing surprising about the tile as a design of this period 
and it may be compared with the stylized treatment of natural 
specinens found in the Oxford Museum or in Watcrhousc's 
Natural History Museum in South Kensington. The latter 
was close in date (commended in 1873) and included 
simulated carvings of botanical and zooloScal specimens of 
terracotta similar in both colour and texture to stone. 
According to M. H. Spielmann (whose source must have 
been Drury himself) Drury was inspired to become an artist 
by the sight of Chantrey's works in the University Galleries 
(British Scttlpture and Sculptors Of To-Day (.London, \90\), 
Ilo) and this carly effort-it may be his earhest surviving 
work-was perhaps presented to the Museum in gratitude. 
It is just possible, however, that it may never have left the 
museum, for the Oxford School of Art which Drury attended 
must be the Government school of design which the Curators 
of the University Gallcrics permitted to occupy the museum 
in 1866. The school had the use of the south end of the 
I,argc Gallery at first and then a part of the Chantrey Gallery 
(the prcscnt Ruskin Lecture Hall) and it was conducted by 
Mr Macdonald whom Ruskin also employed when his school 
was established. Ruskin's school seems to have driven the old 
school downstairs but it continued to operate within the 
Museum until 1895 (minutes of the Curators of the 
University Gauerics, AMS. 41, pp. 37, 38, 39, 42, 55, and 
136). 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably foundry of Alessandro Parlanti, Parson's Green, 
Fulham, or of Singer, Frome, Somerset 
After [Edward] Alfred [Briscoe] DRURY ( 1856-1944) 
481. Griselda 
25.9 cms. (height including integral bronze base); 2.6 cms. 
(height of plinth); 22.5 cms. (length of plinth); 12.5 cms. (width 
of plinth) 
Bronze with a very pale and bright green varnish, dark green in the 
hollows, won to yellow on the salient folds of the sleeve and chipped 
off on nose and on bun. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. Mounted on a 
serpentine plinth swelling forward at front and back. Incised A. 
DRURy in the model in the houow at the back of the bronze base. 
Bequeathed by the Rcvd J. W. R Brocklcbank in November 1926. 
No. 10 on Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927 (`A bust, 
Beatrice'). 
Drury exhibited `Griselda; bronze bust' at the Royal Academy 
in 1896 where it was much admired. It was purchased with 
the Chantrey Bequest for £70 and is now in the reserve 
collection at the Tatc Gallery. Reductions of this life-size 
work (53.5 cms high) are not uncommon and Susan Beattic 
( 777c Nie7p Sc#/Pf#7ic (Ijondon and New Haven, Conn., 1983), 
242) lists examples in public collections in Glasgow, York, 
and Preston in addition to this one. Such reductions must 
have been made from a smaller model by Drury himself for 
they are not mechanical and there are numerous minor 
differences from the larger bronze: most notably there is no 
detached band hanging from the hair and no cherub in the 
hollow of the base in the smaller version. It is, however, less 
common than the 4gr a/a.""ocG#ce, a very similar bronze 
bust portrait of Gracie Doncaster exhibited at the Royal 
Academy in 1897 with which it has often been confused. 
The idea of terminating a bust in this manner was inspired 
by the renewal of popular interest in Italian quattrocento 
sculpture in the last quarter of the nineteenth century and had 
been anticipated in Britain by both Gcorgc Frampton (in his 
C47'¢.ff#de/ of 1889) and Edward Onslow Ford in his A j}#dy 
of c.1890). But the Italians had revived this type of bust by 
the 1860s-in forgcrics as well as imitations. The most famous 
of the former was Bastianini's imagivary portrait of Lucrezia 
Donati, acclaimed by Cavalcaselle as the masterpiece of Mino 
da Fiesole, but cxposcd as a modem work by Dr Alessandro 
Foresi in 1868, and acquired as such by the Victoria and 
Albert Museum in the following year (38-1869). In 1870 
Charles-Jean-Marie Degeorge ( 1837-88 ) exhibited his 
`Bernardino Ccnci' at the Paris Salon (no. 4412) with a great 
success which hc repeated at the Exposition Universelle of 
1878 (Musec de Lyon, 8497; other versions elsewhere). Hc 
had, significantly, created this bust in Italy. When Franpton, 
Ford, and other British sculptors came to revive this type of 
bust it is noteworthy that it was at first also for inagivary 
Portraits. In the case of this work by Drury, the subject was 
fi.om Italian Renaissance literature: Griselda is the heroine of 
Boccaccio's story in the Dcc¢owc7io7¢ (Day 10, Story 10) more 
finiliar to British readers in Chaucer's version, whose meek 
Patience and enduring love, submitted to cruel tests of virtue 
by her high-born husband, were proverbial. The inspiration 
for making a fanciful portrait from Boccaccio may well have 
been Canbi's bust of F¢.¢ac7"c## which Theodosia Trollope 
mentioned as having been four times repeated in her `Notes 
on the Most Recent Productions of Florentine Sculptors', in 
1861 (A#/a"7'7¢¢/ (I July 1861), 211). Drury's decision in 
the following year to adapt the same archaic, or at least quaint, 
format for a portrait of a contemporary seems to have been 
a novel departure. The last notable British bust to adopt this 
format was perhaps Epstein's portrait of Mrs Ambrose 
MCEvoy of 1909-10. 
47
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably foundry of Alessandro Parlanti, Parson's Green, 
Fulham, or of Singer, Frome, Somerset 
After [Edward] Alfred [Briscoe] DRURY ( 1856-1944) 
482. Spring 
43.6 cms. (height including base and plinth); 3.6 cms. (height of 
plinth); 14cms. (length of plinth); 12.45 cms (width of plinth) 
Bronze with a dark green patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. The rough 
base and spreading plinth are integral. Incised `A Drury' in the 
model on the base behind the figure. 
Bequeathed by the Revd R W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
No. 2 on Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927 (`A Statuette 
Female figure symbolising Victory, 17" high . . . on ebonised wood 
plinth'). The statuette was long off display; in recent years it had 
been employed as an ornament in the office of Ion I.owe: it was 
placed in 1988 in the newly decorated Combe Gallery. 
A bronzed plaster of this subject was exhibited as no. 56 in 
the exhibition Sc"/Pf#rc/or fife Hoowc mounted by the Fine 
Art Society in 1902 (S. Bcattie, 777e Niow7 Sc#/P£„yG (I.ondon 
and New Haven, Conn.,1983), 260 no. 61) with a note to 
the cffcct that an edition of twenty bronzes was available (or 
proposed?), each one to cost 40 guineas. Another cast is in 
the Laing Art Ganery, Newcastle upon Tyne. 
There is a relationship between this and the personifications 
of Epc„¢.»g and Mo7'7G¢.7¢g which Drury was commissioned to 
make as standard clcctric lights for the City Square in Lecds, 
one of which hc cxhibitcd at the Royal Academy in 1898 
(no. 1961 ). These works were much influenced by a decorative 
tradition in French sculpture, the N¢j¢f and D¢y by Pradier, 
for example. 
I,{.#Har#f####i#',`'f
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably the foundry of J. W. Singer and Sons, Fromc, 
Somcrsct 
After [Edward] Alfred [Briscoe] DRURY ( 1856-1944) 
483. Joseph Priestley 
56 cms. (height of figure, including integral plinth); 2.5 cms, 
(height of serpentine sub-plinth ) 
Bronze with a dark green patina, worn to pale green in the most 
salient points. A few scratches expose a yellow metal. Hollow, 
probably lost-wax, cast. Chisclled on the back of the plinth in the 
metal: `A DRURy' to proper left, and `1902' to proper right. 
Bequeathed through the National Art-Collections Fund by Charles 
H. Priestley of Marsh Baldon (born 1910, died 13 March 1988, 
exhibitioner at New College, Oxford, 1929-32, long the senior 
partner of the University's solicitors Morrell, Peel and Gamlen, 
appointed in 1978 Deputy Lieutenant for Oxfordshire). The 
sculpture was received in the Museum on 5 April 1988 and placed 
on display in the newly decorated Combe Gallery in the summer of 
that year. 
Drury's first great successes at the Royal Academy, his bronze 
statue of C¢.rcG and his bust of S£ 4g»cJ, were purchased for 
Lecds City Art Gallery in 1894 ( CG.rcc now stands outside in 
the grounds of Leeds City Art Gallery). This helps to explain 
why, later in the decade, hc received from Colonel T. Walter 
Harding (mayor bctwcen 1898 and 1899) the remarkable 
commission for a series of eight bronze electric lamp standards 
in the form of nearly nude women. Four of these casts were 
of a languid Epc"¢.7¢g with her left arm raised and four of a 
more lively A4lor»¢."g with her right arm raised. EPG»¢.#g was 
cxhibitcd at the Royal Academy in 1898. These standards 
were designed to surmount a balustrade surrounding a 
colossal equestrian statue of the Black Prince by Brock in the 
City Square. Part of the same commission-nd also paid for 
by Harding-were bronze statuettes of Joseph Priestley by 
Drury and of Dr Hook by Pomeroy. Statues of two other 
local worthies, both by H. C. Fehr (John Harrison and James 
Watt), were given by RIchard Boston and Richard 
Wainwright. Although most of these works declare themselves 
on their sub-plinths as Sfts of 1903 that of watt dates the 
rift to 1898 and gives 1903 as the date of erection, and this 
was in fact the case with them all. The sculpture has unhappily 
been rearranged in recent years: an idea of its origival setting 
can be obtained from a photograph in the Sf#d¢.a for 
November 1903 (30: 165). Drury exhibited `Joseph Priestley, 
LL.D., F.R.S.; statue for City Square, Leeds' at the Royal 
Academy in 1899 (no. 1890). This was probably a plaster 
cast, a photograph of which is reproduced by M. H. 
Soyidm:am, British Sculpture and Sculptors Of To-Day 
(Ijondon,1901),112. The bronze in Leeds must date from 
1899 or from soon afterwards. It reproduces the artist's 
signature and the date `99' from the model and is chiscucd 
on the back of the plinth: `7w slNGER & soNs FouNDERs', as 
are the lamp standards. 
The date of 1902 on the Ashmolean's statuette might 
suggest that it was cast after the large version and is a reduced 
reproduction. It is, however, not an accurate reproduction. 
50 
Among the minor differences are the more prominent flaps 
to the bucklcd shoes and the position of the index finger over 
the lower part of the lens of the magnifying glass in the 
statuette. It would seem likely that the statuette reproduces a 
preliminary model and that the date, which is chiselled in the 
metal and not reproduced from the model, is that of the 
casting rather than the date when the model was made which 
is likely to have been 1898 or carly 1899. No other casts of 
the statuette are known to us. It may have been made for the 
Pricstley family to which the former owner, Charles Priestley, 
is thought to have belonged. 
Drury's later and far more familiar statue of Sir Joshua 
Reynolds in the forecourt of Burlington House is very similar 
in style and conception. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably foundry of Alessandro Parlanti, Parson's Green, 
Fulham, or of Singer, Frome, Somerset 
After [Edward] Alfrcd [Briscoc] DRURY ( 1856-1944) 
484. Inspiration 
60.5 cms. (height including integral bronze base); 4 cms. (height 
of plinth); 22.7 cms. (1engiv of plinth); 20.6 cms. (width of 
plinth) 
Bronz: with a deep green patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast in one 
piece. Mounted on a plinth with four bronze fcct at the corners 
and decorated with fillets of connemara green marble (one fillet 
behind missing). Incised in the model on the base proper left below 
edge of drapery: `A Drury 08'. 
Bequeathed by the Revd I. W. R Brocklcbank in November 1926. 
No. 3 on Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927 (`A Statuette 
Female draped figure holding laurcls' ) and never subsequently 
correctly named. Long off display; placed in 1988 in the newly 
decorated Combc Gallery. 
A version of the statucttc was exhibited at the Royal Academy 
in 1907 (no.1791) with the title `Inspiration-statuette, 
bronze, Study for statue for principal entrance, Victoria and 
Albert Museun'. It was companion with Kceow/GdgG, also for 
the principal entrance (no. 1780). Panels for the same 
Museum, including the `panel to be erected over the 
entrance', were exhibited by Drury in the following year (as 
nos. 1847, 1855, and 1863). The scheme had been agreed 
by Aston Webb, the architect in 1905. The Portland stone 
statues of J"fp¢.7i¢£¢.o» and K"ow/GofzgG still flank the Museum's 
principal entrance but differ in several respects from the 
statuettes. In the case of J»fp¢.#¢£G.o„ the right knee is drawn 
up in the statue and the cloak meets at her feet- difference 
conditioned by the tight nicheutnd the book is more clearly 
distinguished from the laurel-both for clarity when viewed 
from a distance and from below and because it was easier to 
carve these simpler forms. Another version of this statuette is 
known to me (paired with a J{»ow/c/gG) on the I.ondon art 
market. This version, hke the Ashmolean's, is dated 1908 and 
so it is unlikely to bc the one exhibited in the previous year 
(mustrated in the albums in the Royal Academy Library). A 
cast of I"fp¢.r¢f¢.o„ dated 1909 with one of K#ow/c/E9c dated 
1916, both on Connemara marble plinths, were lot 56 at 
Christie's, I.ondon, 23 May 1991. They were marked `Tiffany 
& Co.'-the firm which seems to have marketed Drury's 
bronzes in the United States. 
52 
Probably foundry of Alcssandro Parlanti, Parson's Green, 
Fulham, or of Singer, Fromc, Somerset 
After [Edward] Alfred [Briscoe] DRURY ( 1856-1944) 
485. Sculpture 
20.55 cms. (height of figure including bronze base); 3.3 cms. 
(height of plinth); 10.5 cms. (length of plinth); 9.4 cms. (width 
of plinth) 
Bronze with a pale grccn patina (less bright green than the J„/¢7?f 
B¢cc¢#f, No. 486, or the G".fc/d¢, No. 481); some verdigris around 
crown and elsewhere. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. Mounted on the plinth 
of pale serpentine. Incised `A. Drury' in the model on the base 
behind the figure. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
No. 26 on Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927 (`reclining 
female figure with a laurel wreath and an effigy'). 
Uncertain how the figure should be labcllcd, C. F. Bell 
enquired of the sculptor himself. Drury wrote on 16 May 
1929 explaining that `the crouched woman's figure is the 
same as that on the right hand corner at the top of the marble 
frame of the John Oliver Hobbs [f¢.c] memorial in the I.ondon 
University I.ibrary'. He suggested that Bell might call it `What 
you like'. 
John Oliver Hobbes was the pseudonym of Pearl Mary-
Tercsa CraiSc (nee Richards), a star of Edinburgh high 
society whose elegant novels and plays were enormously 
popular and are now almost entirely forgotten. When she 
died aged 38 in 1906 her friends subscribed for a monument 
to be erected in University College where she had been 
educated. Since she was much admired in her native America 
it was decided to open a parallel subscription there under the 
auspices of Joseph Choatc, the American ambassador. This 
was a success and a rephca of the monument was 
commissioned and Barnard College selected as a suitable 
location, no doubt because Mrs Choate was a trustee and 
had helped found the institution. The only direct connection 
would seem to have been that Mrs Craigie had lectured with 
great success to the Barnard Union on Botticelli and Dante 
in the December before she died (B¢7'79¢7i¢ B#//e£¢.» ( 11 
Deccmbcr 1905),1). 
After some searching the memorial was declared in a letter 
to mc of October 1986 to be no longer in University College 
Library and the suggestion made that it was a victim of war 
damage, but on a more intensive search it was discovered on 
the wall above the entrance to `Enquiries and Take Out'. The 
replica of the monument seems to have been erected in the 
theatre of Barnard College. It was taken down when the 
theatre was rcnovatcd and was in March of 1983 on the 
basement floor outside the Central Records Office when there 
were moves to re-erect it again. When I called in late August 
1988 it could not be found, although it had recently been 
seen in a store room. 
In the University College version the bronze profile relief 
Portrait and the laurel crown against the smokey pink marble 
apron below have been crudely daubed with `gold' paint 
which has dribbled. The relief portrait is signed and dated 
1908. The tablet is crowned with two `bronze statuettes: a 
version of the Ashmolcan's figure but holding a mask 
(resembling, at first sight, a scvercd head) in place ofa statucttc 
and a figure, similarly posed but in revcrsc, holding a wreath 
and a book. The general scheme seems to have been invcntcd 
by Frampton for his memorial to Charles Kecne ( 1896, Tatc 
Gallery). Drury exhibited a `Mural Tablet to the late Pearl 
Mary Teresa Craigie ("John Oliver Hobbes") To be erected 
at University College, I.ondon and in America' at the Royal 
Academy in 1908 (no.1943) and a silver plaque of her, 
possibly identical to the portrait relief in the tablet but in 
another medium, in 1910 (no. 1839). 
Separate casts seem to have been made of the other 
allegorical figure crowning the memorial. One entitled 
L¢.£g#¢f#rc was no. 133 in the exhibition held at Foyles Art 
Gancry, London, 10 October-I November 1968, entitled 
`Collector's Luck, paintings, sculpture . . . in the collection of 
Mr Stowers Johnson'. It may be that Drury's rcplaccmcnt of 
the mask with a statuette made the Ashmolean's figure into 
an allegory of sculpture (as distinct from Drama which would 
have suited Hobbes). If so it might have been done to sell it 
as a pair with a kneeting personification of Painting holding 
a palette, examples of which have been on the I.ondon art 
market in recent years (Fine Art Society, October 1973; 
Christie's, 3 April 1985, No. 207-subsequently Agnews, 
wiriter r985. Old Master Drawings and Scttlpture, rro. 76). 
The manner in which the hair and drapery are built up in 
long thin, flat strips is highly characteristic of Dniry and 
perhaps reflects his use of plasticine as well as wax and clay as 
a material for modelling. The type of twisted kneeling pose 
reflects Drury's fascination with the work of Alfred Stevens, 
many of whose drawings hc owned (and some of which are 
now in the Ashmolean). 
53
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
54 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably foundry of Alessandro Parlanti, Parson's Green, 
Fulham, or of singer, Fromc, Somerset 
After [Edward] Alfred [Briscoe] DRURY ( 1856-1944) 
486. Infant Bacchus 
24.1 cms. (height of figure including integral bronze base); 
8.2 cms. (diameter of bronze base) 
Bronze with a green patina, slightly scratched on the figure's back 
to reveal yellow metal. Hollow, heavy, cast. Iron armature in 
interior. Incised `A Drury' (the initial indistinct because of. burr) in 
the model on the side of the tree-trunk. Original onyx plinth (see 
below) untraccd. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
No. 31 on Andrew Shirlcy's rcccipt of January 1927 (`A young 
Bacchanal holding a wine cup 92J' high by A. Drury on onyx plinth'). 
Uncertain how the figure should be labelled, C. F. Bell 
enquired of the sculptor himself. Drury rcphicd on 16 May 
1929 explaining `The little boy in bronze is a study for a panel 
which I did for the I.ivcr Insurance in Piccadilly' and urSng 
him to call it `what you like'. The building to which Drury 
rcfcrs is no.161 Piccadilly, on the corner of st James's Strcct, 
now the Bradford and Binglcy Building Society, origivally the 
office of the Royal Insurance Company. A photograph of 
1909 in the National Monuments Record (NBR DD60/125) 
shows it as it was shortly after opening. Drury cxhibitcd his 
`Panel over Entrance, Royal Insurance Office, St James's 
Street' at the Royal Academy in that year (no. 1738), probably 
as a plaster. The Royal Insurance building is one of the most 
aggressively chunky examples of Edwardian baroque 
architecture in the West End of I.ondon. It also features a 
cornice supported by paired nude boys in recesses beside 
oricl windows. Drury's panel, which is placed over the Doric 
entrance in the chamfered corner of the building between 
Piccadilly and St James's Street, is carved in Portland Stone. 
It consists of two putti whose twisted poses respond to the 
shape of the cartouche between them, and one of these figures 
is closely related to the Ashmolcan's bronze. Drapery, 
howcvcr, covers his hair, oak lcavcs from a branch emerging 
from under the cartouche conceal his genitals, and in his right 
hand he holds an ohvc branch to form a crown to the 
Company's emblem of a stork holding a twig in its beak. 
It sccms unlikely that Drury can ever have seriously 
proposed givng this child the attributes of Bacchus which 
could not have been appropriate for an insurance company 
and we must question his claim that it is a `study for' the 
panel. More likely hc saw that the torsion devised for 
decorative purposes could be given a narrative meaning (or, 
possibly, hc had cahier studies for a Bacchic subject in the 
manner of Jules Dalou in whose Paris studio Drury had 
worked between 1881 and 1885 which he adapted for the 
panel; after all the first sculpture he exhibited at the Royal 
Academy, in 1885, was A £7"."owP¢ a/SG./e»#J). This was a 
period in which modern bronze statuettes were most in vogue 
and there are other instances of Drury modifying 
commissioned pieces in order to create statuettes of a 
domestic scale (cf. Nos. 483, 484). The figure is suggestive 
of enchantment as well as of intoxication and is comparable 
in feeling with the C¢.7.cG which Drury exhibited at the Royal 
Academy in 1893, and had cast in bronze in the following 
year (this is now in the grounds of Lecds City An Gallery). 
The mood is also found in Frederick Macmonnics's B¢ccha#£g 
of 1896 (Metropolitan Museum, New York, and elsewhere). 
For the modelling in flat strips, very evident in the treatment 
of bark and hair, see No. 485. 
55
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably foundry of Alessandro Parlanti, Parson's Green, 
Fulham, or of Singer, Frome, Somerset 
After [Edward] Alfred [Briscoe] DRURY ( 1856-1944) 
487. Crouching female nude 
(a Lifith) 
18.5 cms. (height); 8.8 cms. (length of base); 7.8 cms. (width of 
base) 
Bronze with a brown patina, varied from dark russet on base to 
yellow-brown on chest; spots of verdigris in the interstices; hollow 
(probably lost-wax) cast; iron armature wire in the interior; inscribed 
`A. DRURy.1912' in the model across the back of the rough rock 
base. 
Given by Cyril da Costa Andrade, of Morocco House, Bayard's 
Cove, Dartmouth, Devon, 1956, together with the figure by Phoebc 
Stabler (No. 570). RCSstcred on 3 October. Mr Andradc gave and 
bequeathed many items to the museum but most of these were 
ceramics-see No. 457 especially. 
The yearning look of the figure and the attitude suggest more 
than the usual pretexts for movement in a female nude+the 
wringing-out or winding-up of hair. There is a relationship in 
56 
pose with the sculptor's marble statuette £¢./¢.£¢, his diploma 
work, exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1916 (no.1941), 
although the head there is turned the other way to regard 
the snake sliding on her right arm. The rocky base is Similar 
in both works. Drury had exhibited a bronze statuette entitled 
LG./¢.£4 at the Royal Academy in 1913 (as no. 2012; Ray#/ 
Ac¢deowy P¢.cf"ref ¢"d Sc#/P£#yG (I.ondon,1913), pl. 7) and 
this might have bccn cast in the year before. What may have 
been the same statuette was also exhibited there (as no. 1375) 
in 1945 (the year after his death). One other cast is known 
to us-in the I.aing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tync-but 
in it the fingers of one hand arc missing. It was made from a 
broken model, perhaps posthumously, which would be 
consistent with the identification as L¢./¢.£¢. Drury's fascination 
with poses of this sort is well demonstrated by the symmetrical 
sequence of nine panels involving ten kneeling and crouching 
women over the main entrance of the Victoria and Albert 
Museum (c.1908). 
Unknown foundry, perhaps that of Alessandro Parlanti, 
Parson's Green, Fulhan 
After Sir Jacob EI'STEIN ( 1880-1959) 
488. Noneen (Head of a girl) 
33.7 cms. (height). 
Bronze with a very dark brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. 
Mounted on the origival tapering black slate plinth now adorned 
with the title in gold letters. 
Bequeathed, together with a collection of English twentieth-century 
paintings and drawings, by Thomas Balston in 1968 through the 
National Art-Collections Fund. Registered 8 February 1968. 
The head was modelled in 1919 and shown at his successful 
(and controversial) exhibition at the Ijciccstcr Galleries in the 
following year (as no. 9.>). Up to six bronze casts seem to 
have been made. See E. Silber, 7Z7G Sc%/P£#„ a/Epf£GG.% 
(Oxford, 1986), 146, no. 106 (the Ashmolcan version, her 
no. I, illustrated). According to Silber, Epstein tended to use 
Paulanti's foundry for portraits at this period (ibid. 116). 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
57
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknown foundry, perhaps that of Alessandro Parlanti, 
Parson's Green, Fulham 
After Sir Jacob EI'STEIN ( 1880-1959) 
489. Peggy-Jean 
22.5 cms. (height) 
Bronze with a mid-brown to yellow-brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax, 
cast. Mounted on the original tapering black slate plinth, now 
adorned with title in gold letters. 
Bequeathed in 1945 by Roger Fulford through the National Art-
Collections Fund. 
The sitter was the sculptor's first daughter, born in October 
1918 and the subject of a series of busts from earliest infancy 
onwards. This is catalogucd by Evelyn Silber as the ninth 
portrait in the series and represents I'eggy-Jean laughing., 
aged two years and nine months ( 777c Sc„/Pf"re a/Epj£G¢7¢ 
(Oxford, 1986), 150, no. 124-the Ashmolean version, her 
no. 3, illustrated). The sculpture was exhibited at the Leicester 
Galleries in 1924. It seems then to have been available in an 
edition of up to six, but according to Lady Epstein, as cited 
by Shber, there was an edition of twelve. According to Silbcr 
Epstein tended to use Parlanti's foundry for portraits at this 
period (ibid.116). 
58 
I-
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
David EVANS ( 1895-1959) 
490. Bust portrait of Sir Aithur 
John Evans D.Lit., FBA, FRS, etc. 
66.5 cms. (height, including integral base); 19.5 cms. (length of 
integral base); 22.5 cms. (width of integral base) 
Carrara marble. Incised on the integral base to proper left: 
`DAVID . EVANS.' Mounted on a wooden pedestal of tapering term 
form painted white and adorned with standard `Georgian' ornaments 
painted gold. 
For provenance see below. 
Sir Arthur Evans ( 1851-1941 ) was Keeper of the Ashmolean 
Museum from 1884 until 1908 and Honorary Keeper 1908- 
41. As is explained in the Introductory Essay in Volume I, he 
secured for the Museum Fortnum's collections and the funds 
which made possible the transfer of the Ashmolean Museum 
to the University Galleries. He is most famous for his 
excavations in Crete. The bust was presented to Sir Arthur 
Evans by the Rt. Hon. Lord Rennell representing `friends 
and colleagues' at 4.15 on 17 December 1934 in the Rooms 
of the Society of Antiquaries, Burlington House. A printed 
circular (kept among the Evans papers in the Department of 
Antiquities) lists the friends and colleagues-vcr 300 of 
them-mostly archaeologists, but including C. F. Bell and 
Kcnncth Clark, who may be presumed to have subscribed 
for the bust not long before. The bust was exhibited at the 
Royal Academy in 1937 (as no.1451). It may be assumed 
that the bust was acquired by the Museum after Evans's death 
in 1941 : it was never regarded as belongivg to the 
Department of western Art and, not being a work of ancient 
art, its acquisition seems not to have been recorded by the 
Department of Antiquities. The sculptor, David Evans, was 
not related to Sir Arthur. He was born in Manchester, studied 
at the Manchester School of Art, the Royal College of Art 
(with a National Scholarship), and the Royal Academy 
Schools (where hc was a British Institution Scholar in 1921 
and a Landseer Scholar in 1922 and won the Rome Prize). 
Hc exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1921. In the 
Dictionary Of Contemporary British Arts o£ L92;9 (ed. 8. 
Dolman) hc described himself as a `modernist sculptor and 
carver'). It may have been the success of his portraits of John 
Galsworthy and Hugh Walpole shown at the Academy in 
1929 and 1931 that prompted the commission of the bust 
of iThur Evans. 
59
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Francesco FANELLI (active 1609nd2 ) 
491. Fountain-head in the form of 
Cupid, blindfold, riding a dolphin 
12.9 cms. (height); 8.5 cms. (length); 6.7cms. (width); 11.3 cms. 
(length of ebony base; 8.8 cms. width of same) 
Bronze with fire-Slding won at the most salient points (especially 
in the arms and right leg of Cupid) to reveal a yellow metal. Some 
black tarnishing in the hollows. Very thin-walled, hollow, lost-wax, 
cast. There is a firing crack at the point of contact between the tat 
of the dolphin and Cupid. The wing behind Cupid's right shoulder 
is broken off. A plug is evident beside the quiver and in Cupid's 
right thigh. The bow is missing from Cupid's left hand where minute 
traces of solder remain. The hole between the finger and thumb of 
Cupid's right hand has apparently been drilled, presumably to take 
a bow string. There are holes in the bronze (e.g. on top of the 
head), some of them caused by chaplet pins. Three such pins are 
still in place in the integral naturalistic base. A small arched aperture 
is cut out of the back of this base, presumably to admit a pipe which 
enabled the dolphin to spout. Mounted on an oval, moulded, base 
of ebonized wood. `8.434 G' is painted in black on the rim of the 
integral bronze base. 
I.ent by C. D. E. Fortnum in March 1888 and given later in the 
same year. 8.423 in his catalogues. `1 bought it in Italy', Fortn`rm 
observed in his large catalogue, but there is no note of provenance 
in the earlier notebook catalogue. A manuscript sheet headed 
`Memoranda of prices pald', includes the entry under 1859 `Br. 
Cupid on Dolphin dlt' for the sum of £2 10j.. 
Fortnum who seldom expressed his enthusiasm in his 
catalogue had recourse to slang in describing the merits of 
this tittle bronze: `thc vigorous action and "go" denotes the 
modching of an able ha.nd'. Hc considered it to be `probably 
Venetian' and of the mid-sixtccnth century and observed that 
`it probably fomed part of a table fountain, a pipe having 
passed from behind through the dolphin's mouth'. On the 
opposite page of his notebook catalogue hc recorded the 
version in the collection of sir RIchard Wallace, an ungrded 
bronze today in the Wallace Collection (S85), which differs 
in minor details (having a different cap and fluttering ribbons 
on the quiver for instance), is better preserved, but is a similarly 
thin cast (now stopped up with wax) with firing cracks in one 
arm and on top of Cupid's right wing. Bode included the 
WalLacc bronze .in his Italian Bronac Statuettes Of the 
Rc"¢¢.fj¢#cc (London, 1907-12), ii, pl. Cljxv) as Venetian 
and of about 1575. C. F. Bell added a note to Fortnum's 
large catalogue that another example was in the collection of 
Alfred Beit and had been exhibited at the Royal Academy in 
the winter exhibition of 1904. Bode included this in his 
Italian Bronac Statuettes Of the Renaissance (i, pl. XLI1) as 
Florentine in origiv, or at least influence, and of the mid-sixteenth 
century. (This version remains in the Beit Collection 
at Russborough.) Another version was in the collection of 
the dcalcr T. M. Whitehead sold Christie's, London, 10 May 
1898, lot 101 (with a provenance from the Junze Collection 
sold seven years before in Paris): this was acquired by George 
Salting and formed part of his bequest to the Victoria and 
60 
Albert Museum (A.103-1910). This last version is gilded, like 
the Ashmolcan's, but, as with the Wallace bronze, there are 
minor variations in the modelling-the dolphin's tat does not 
make contact with Cupid's thigh as it does in the Oxford 
version-nd there are similar imperfections in the casting. 
There is also a variant of the group in which a very similar 
Cupid, but without a blindfold and with his right hand futhcr 
back, as if hc had just shot his bow, is seated on the dolphin's 
back. A version is in the National Gallery of Art in Washington 
(A.203.4lc) displayed as `Venetian, second half of the 
sixtccnth ccntury' (following J. Pope-Hennessy, Coowp/c£G 
Catalogtte Of the Sunttel H. Kress Collection.. Renaissance 
Brt7»2;eJ (Ijondon,1965), no. 520, fig. 553); another was at 
Christic's, I.ondon,13 December 1988, lot 136 
(uniuustratcd), and a third, Slded, version, attached to a 
fohatc backplate, scrvcd as the spout for a Ming blue and 
white baluster vase adapted as a table cistcm which was at 
Christie's, I.ondon, 6 December 1988 (mustrated there and 
also in Christie'§ International Magazine (RIov.-Dec. \988), 
46-7). These may bc invented at a later date than the more 
crisply modelled and dynamically composed group of the 
standing, blindfold Cupid. In any case they sccm to have been 
cast at a later date for one such group appears on a clock of 
about 1685 made for the English Crown by the ljondon 
maker Jeremic Gregory (Victoria and Albert Museum, W. 35- 
1976). 
Anthony Radcliffc, who first noted the version on the clock, 
was also the first to note that the Cupids in thcsc bronzes 
are of the same type (possibly even from the same model) as 
one that rides a galloping wild-maned horse in a bronze 
bronze group which survives in several versions and which is 
documented in the inventory of Charles I's collection as a 
work by `ffiancisco ffancllo', `ffiancisco the one eyed Italian' 
(A. Radcliffe and P. Thornton, `John Evelyn's Cabinet', 
Co»"o¢.ffc#7 (Apr. 1978), 262 n. ). Just as the Cupid rode both 
a dolphin and a horse, so the horse was ridden by St. George 
as wen as by Cupid (for this group see I. Pope-Henncssy, 
`Some Bronze Statuettes by Francesco Fanelli', EJJ¢yr o„ 
Jf#/¢.¢„ Sc"/P£„rc (London,1968),166-71 ). 
Fanelli ieceivcd payment for work for King Charles I on 8 
May 1635 and on 20 November received an additional 
payment from the Crown. In 1640 he signed the bust of the 
Prince of wales (today at Wclbeck Abbey) as `Sculptor to the 
RIng'. Vertuc recorded in the eighteenth century that he died 
in England but it has been conjectured that hc went into 
exile with the court in the carly 1640s and it is significant that 
one edition of his V¢".c ¢rc¢¢.£G##7iG appeared in Paris in 
1661. Hc may have returned to England after this (or of 
course before, for there is no reason to suppose that hc 
directly supervised this or any edition). On the title-page of 
the book Fanclli is described as sculptor to the king of 
Enaland-presumably Charles 11, unless the pubhshcr was 
employing an earlier text or indeed republishing the book. 
Here, as in the signature on the bust cited above, Fanelli 
insists on his Florentine origivs. 
Fanelli is in fact recorded in Genoa in January 1608 as the 
son of a Florentine sculptor, Virgilio Fanelli, casting bronze 
putti for an altar. Between July and October of the following 
year he was making a crucifix for G.-D. Spinola to the 
approval of the palntcr Giovanni-Battista PagS, and a smaller 
bronze crucifix, with a `zoccolo in forma di Monte' which 
was fitted with openings to serve as a cabinet, is mentioned 
as made by him for the same Genocsc patron in the following 
year. He is recorded on 4 September 1620 as receiving the 
commission to cast (`Manifatturarc') all of the bronzes for 
the Chapel of Our Lady in the Chiesa dclla Vigna, Genoa, 
under the supervision of Paggi and the sculptor Battista 
Orsolino. On 26 May 1627 he was commissioned to cast the 
bronze capitals of the sane chapel. (G. Varni, R¢.cor¢¢. dG. 
ql.:uni fepditori in bronac (GenoaL, L879), 52-3, and I. 
A+zRri,,N`o,t`ifje,deiproif?fsorideldisegnoinLeguriadalleorigini 
a/ fGco/a Xvr, 6 vols. (Genoa, 1870-80), vi. 196-9, and 394- 
6). Although it is generally assumed that his small bronzes 
made for English collectors (notably King Charles I and the 
duke of Newcastle) were first made in England, Fancm may 
have brought the moulds from Italy and the fact that a number 
of his small bronzes, including this one, have an Italian 
provcnancc also suggests this. (In this connection see also the 
entry for No. 492.) 
The fact that the Ashmolcan's Cg¢P¢.d o# ¢ ch/4¢¢.# served 
as a table fountain renrinds us of Fanclli's designs for grottoes 
and garden watervorks pubhished in V¢„.c ¢7ic4G.£e#eerG. This 
usually has a title-page dated Paris 1661 (but the copy in the 
Ashmolean Museum is undated). No two copies of this `book' 
seem to be compiled in the same order (I have inspected six). 
The plates were also issued in two series with separate titles: 
F?ntaip.e_s e? .jets d'?an, dessin6s d'apr¢s |s;Nc] les [has beaus 
li.e.tt.x d:Italie |!ar Fr. Fanelli Flor;ntin-Sc;lpterir dtt rot 
¢'4gleterre and De§sins de grottos par Fa!;elli (Bri;dsh 
Museum,1937-9-15-442-I-255). The former of these titles 
is significant because it acknowledges the unoridnality of the 
designs. The documents from Genoa suggest that in his larger 
work at least Fanelli worked under the direction of other 
artists, as well as making clear that he was a founder. Sandrart 
whilstclaimingthathcattractedthcattcntionofKingCharles1 
by a work in ivory also emphasizes his direct involvement with 
metal casting, his bronzes requiring no after work with either 
chisel or Elf i, schneiden oder f ellen (Teut§che Academic 
(Nuremberg, 1675), i. 350). It is indeed the case that this 
bronze and others by him have received little or no toohng. 
The results arc often very rough but this may have been 
acccptablc to patrons appreciative of the unfinished in other 
art forms such as old master drawings. One wonders whether 
thercisaconnectionbetweenFanclhiandtheltalianworkshop 
which produced the series of bronzes of which the Triton 
inkstand (No. 232) is an example, also remarkable for their 
lack of tooling. That workshop was also notable for 
permutations of stock elements. Fanelli's dolphin is similar to 
those which this workshop employed. The subject of Cupid 
riding such a fish however was a favourite one in the miniature 
arts of the Greeks and Romans-as exemplified, for example, 
by some gold ear-pendants in the Ashmolcan Museum 
(Oldficld Bequest no. 29)-as Fanem and his patrons surely 
knew. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Since this catalogue entry was written my attention has 
been drawn to the fuller biographical account and survey of 
the artist's work made by Patricia Wengraf for the catalogue 
o£ Cpe chi:hi[iton Kunst in der Repttbli-k Gentta 1528-18-15 
at the Schim Kunsthalle, Frankfurt August-November, 1992.
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably by Francesco FANELLI (active 1609nd2) 
492. Laoco6n with his two sons 
10.55 cms. (height); 10.45 cms. (length); 4.I cms. (width) 
Bronze, with a warm brown natural patina and traces of black varnish 
in the hollows. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. There are two small holes 
in the back of I.aoco6n himself, and one similar hole beside his left 
foot. Integral rectangular plinth. Mounted on a block of fine 
patterned and unusually pink porphyry. `8 /451 G' is palntcd in 
white on the rear of the rock-work upon which the figures arc seated 
(the numerals are partially worn off). 
I.cnt by C. D. E. Fortnum in March 1888 and given by him later in 
the same year. 8. 451 in his catalogucs. Bought at the Dc I,a Salle 
sale in London for £21, according to the notebook catalogue. The 
margin of the notebook catalogue is also annotated with a resolution 
to rcnumber the bronze as 8. 462. 
Fortnum in his large catalogue wrote of this that `the 
modelling is very spirited, able, and artistic; it is cast directly 
from the wax'. He was aware of another version in the 
collection of J. C. Robinson (exhibited at the Burlington Fine 
Arts Club in 1879, no. 125) and noted that it differed in the 
details. C. F. Bell annotated the manuscript catalogue with 
rcfcrcnccs to one in Wiuiam Ncwall's collection exhibited at 
the Winter Exhibition of the Royal Academy in 1904 (case I, 
no. 10-this was sold at Christie's, I.ondon, 27-9 June 1922, 
lot 44) and to two in Florence-the versions now on display 
in the Bargello, numbered 531 (formerly 149, from the Uffizi, 
and hence probably the Grand Ducal Collections) and one 
numbered 219c (from the Carrand Couection). One is also 
in the Staathchc Museen, Berlin-Dahlem ( 1953, in reserve; 
Bode, Italian Bronac Statuettes Of the Ranai§§ance (London, 
1907-12), pl. LXXXIV) and another is in the Fitzwilliam 
Museum, Cambridge (M24-1951). 
All these works are very close in character and size and the 
differences are best explained by there being moulds fi-om 
which wax casts were made which had to be worked up before 
investiture for the bronze casting. Thus in the larger foms, 
the rock, the body of I.aco6n, and indeed his head, there is 
little variation, whereas the snakes are always varied and so is 
the raised am of the boy to proper left of the group. 
The group is loosely based on the famous antique marble 
group in the Vatican but the sculptor has imagived the action 
as it would develop, with one son having given up the struggle. 
Fortnum noted that a similar attitude to the subject was taken 
by the modeller of one of his Renaissance medals (no. 707 in 
his catalogue, 120.19 in the Museum's typescript catalogue; 
Mohinier 615 ). 
The Leocod." groups must bc associated with others 
reprcscnting the Dc¢£b a/Acf¢eo„, Ve#"f ¢„d Ade„G.f, and 
07P4e"f ¢#¢ CG#4cr#f ( all represented in the Victoria and 
Albert Museum, but also, with variations, in other collections) 
which are of similar size and modelled in the same way, cvcn 
with the same thin vermiculate elements reflecting a technique 
of rolling the wax, and cast with the same thin walls and 
frcqucnt perforations and cracks, and little if any tooling. In 
turn these bronzes must be associated not only with larger 
62 
groups of the same and similar subjects but with rclicfs, and 
in particular a pair reprcscnting CbrG.¢ c¢»)i¢."g fife C#orJ and 
th:a Holy Funily with the robberJs child (rcpreseITted in 
numerous public collections including the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, the Metropolitan Museum, New York, the 
Minneapolis Institute of Art, and the Spenccr Art Gallery of 
the University of Kansas at I.awrencc). These reliefs in turn 
arc very close in technique and quite close in style to the little 
square reliefs representing aninals and the larger reliefs 
raprcsendmg Orphetts charming the animal kingdom a;nd cha 
reowp£¢f¢.a" a/Ad¢co ¢#d Epc (for which see A. Radcliffc and 
P. Thornton, `John Evelyn's Cabinct', Co„„o¢.JJc#7 (Apr. 
1978), 254ndl ). These in turn arc similar in technique to 
and have some compelling stylistic similarities with the little 
bronzcs which correspond to those described by Vcrtue in 
the eighteenth century as by Fanclli and belonSng to the earl 
of Oxford, having oridnally been made for the duke of 
Newcastle (J. Pope-Hcnncssy. `Somc Bronze Statuettes by 
F[ancesco Fanelli:' , Essays on Italian Sculptwre (Ijondon, 
1968),166-71). 
Reviewing these highly convincing connecting chains 
chiefly built up by Jcnnifer Montagu and Anthony Radcliffe 
it must be admitted that no direct connection can be made 
betwccn the style of the miniature L¢ocod." groups and any 
of the statuettes listed by Vertue, or included in the inventory 
of King Charles I, as by Fanelli. If the L¢ocod.„ groups are by 
Fanclli then it is intcrcsting that one version at least has an 
old Italian provenance, for it suggests that hc made some of 
them before settling in England. Before the connection with 
Fanelli was proposed, the IA¢ocod." groups were generally 
considered to be Italian of the sixteenth century and this was 
also Fortnum's opinion. One version in the Bargcllo has 
recently been published as Geman (A7¢¢. ¢e/ A4ledS.oovo G ¢c/ 
Rinaccimento-Oma{qqio ai Carmnd (Florence. L989), 26\ , 
no. 46). 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably William Pitts ( 1790-1840) 
After John FIAXMAN ( 1755-1826) 
493. Shield of Achilles 
95.5 cms. (diameter) 
Bronze with a dark chestnut brown to black patina. Sand-cast in 
two chief pieces: the central circle, with the continuous line of stars 
on the circumference, as one piece, and the remainder as the other 
piece. On the reverse the irregular rim of the outer piece may be 
seen, folded over at the soldered junction with the central circle. 
The six projecting forelegs and two projecting heads of the horses 
of Apollo have all been cast separately. Some of the attachments are 
visible in the hollowed reverse. In the case of the foremost legs 
nearest the centre to either side it is not the whole but merely most 
of the leg that has been cast separatelyut hair-line join above the 
knees can be seen on close inspection. The reverse of the outer piece 
reveals at least three vestigial seams corresponding to the manner in 
which the mould was assembled. Two suspension rings are soldered 
to the reverse of the central circle and two to one side (not to the 
top) of the outer rim. 
Given by `Messrs. Rundell and Bridge' on 14 October 1842 
(Minutes of Hebdomadal Board) payments are recorded for `Iron 
work for Shic[d' on 13 April 1846 probably in connection with 
hanSng it in the University Galleries. It was placed in the Principal 
Sculpture Gallery (now the Randolph Gallery) near Westmacott's 
T77.¢/ a/Soc7i¢fgf (No. 589 ) and the small copy of the Dy¢."gg/¢¢;¢£07 
(ENo. 5L9). (Handbook Gttide f or the University Galleries (Oxford, 
1865),14). (A cast of the shield now in the Fitzwilliam Museum 
was given to the University of Cambridge by Rundell and Bridge in 
1842). The shield has long hung in the centre of the north wall of 
the Print Room above the cabinets: it is likely to have been placed 
there at the same date as the groups by Alfred Stevens (Nos. 571- 
2) which flank it. 
The reconstruction of the storiated armour described in 
ancient epic poetry had much' exercised antiquarians and 
artists in the eighteenth century, but the fabrication of such 
in metal was typical of the last century. It is not known when 
exactly Flaxman was commissioned by the royal goldsmiths 
and jewcllers Rundell, Bridge and Rundell of 32 Ludgate 
Hill, Ijondon, to design a modern version of the most famous 
of such pieces of armour, the shield fashioned by Hephaestus 
for Achilles and described at length near the cnd of the 
eighteenth book of the I/¢.¢¢. Nor is it clear whether the idea 
came from the goldsmiths or from Flaxman himself: Flaxman 
was certainly an obvious choice since he had made his 
reputation with his illustrations for Homer and connoisseurs 
may well have realized that he excelled in relief on a relatively 
small scale. 
Maria Denman, Flaxman's niece, protested against Alan 
Cunningham's suggestion that Flaxman's source was Pope's 
translation. We need not suppose that Flaxman was a classical 
scholar, as she implied, but his study of the poetry was 
certainly as reverential as his treatment of it was imaginative. 
The a]:ronyrrLorus Memoirs Of the late Philip Rundell (Lendon> 
1827), 22-3, pictures the learned goldsmith listening for 
hours on end to the learned sculptor reading from the I/G.¢d 
which suggests a finiliarity between them that is improbable, 
64 
but the commission certainly was conceived more as artistic 
`sponsorship' rather than a mere commercial venture. The 
sponsorship had a promotional aspect of course but this 
depended upon the work being relished by scholars and 
connoisseurs. The chief source surely ty¢f Pope's translation. 
There shone the image of the master-mind: 
There earth, there heaven, there ocean he designed; 
The unwearied sun, the moon completely round; 
The starry lights that heaven's high convex crown'd . . . 
The centre of the shield rcprescnts the heavens and the border 
the oceans. The circuit of reliefs between represents life on 
earth. Flaxman places the chariot of the sun in the centre of 
his shield surrounded by the constellations, giving the sun an 
emphasis which is not found in Homer, but he must have felt 
that some climax and focus was essential and this was certainly 
appropriate. The circuit of reliefs commences below the centre 
at 6.00 and progresses anticlockwise. 
Here sacred pomp and genial feast delight, 
And solemn dance, and hymeneal rite. 
The feasting is seen in the background; the bridal procession 
in front. This graduates into a scene of citizens quarrelling 
over homicide (a supine victim can just be perceived on the 
ground) and over the payment of a debt, which is followed 
by a judicial appeal presided over by elders on stone seats. 
Then there is an abrupt transition (abrupt in Homer as well) 
to a scene of warfare before a besieged city. Some of the 
besieged ambush their assailants, assisted by Minerva and 
Mars. Flaxman chose not to emphasize the slaughter of sheep 
and oxen which this entailed, but one carcass of each animal 
can be seen to the right. There is then another transition. 
Oxen driving ploughs are represented moving in two 
directions and the landlord waits to reward the sweating 
labourers with a goblet when they ton round. Beside this is 
a field of grain which is cut with sickles by men, bound into 
sheaves by women, and carried off by children. Meanwhile an 
ox is slaughtered for the harvest feast. Next we see the vines 
gathered in and four brave herdsmen with nine cowardly 
dogs confronting a predatory pair of lions. 
The last scene represents a dance: 
The maids in soft simars of linen dress'd; 
The youths all graceful in the glossy vest: 
Of those the locks with flowery wreath inroll'd; 
Of these the sides adorn'd with swords of gold, 
That glittering gay, from silver belts depend. 
Now all at once they rise, at once descend, 
With well-taught feet: now shape in oblique ways, 
Confusedly regular, the moving maze: 
Now forth at once, too swift for sight, they spring, 
And undistinguish'd blend the flying ring: 
So whirls a wheel, in giddy circle toss'd, 
And, rapid as it runs, the single spokes are lost. 
The gazing multitudes admire around: 
Two active tumblers in the centre bound . . . 
I-
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
The economy with which Flaxman represents this in a few 
inches is worthy of special comment, as is his intelligence in 
combining it with the marriage procession so that that relief 
divides into thrcc rather than four pairs: Peace, War, and the 
sources of wealth and health (bread, wine, and meat). 
Flaxman's close attention to the text is remarkable and 
apart from the emphasis given to Apollo the only important 
difference lies in his avoidance of pictorial effects, the city 
background for the marriage, and still more the landscape with 
forests, sheep folds, and pasture upon which Homer dwells 
after his description of the lion attack. Flaxman knew of 
course that ancient Greeks would not have included such 
effects in a sculpture. Indccd even the very low-relief 
backgrounds and overlapping planes that hc does allow were 
such as one would not find in ancient Greek work. (In this 
respect Ludwig van Schwanthalcr's S¢¢.G/¢ a/He7i¢4/Gf in the 
Liebieghaus, Frankfurt, may bc taken as a purist correction 
of Flaxman. ) The most surprising respect in which Flaxman's 
shield departs from Homer's is that it was made in uniform 
silver gilt or uniform dark brown bronze whereas the passage 
in Homer, like most poetic accounts of ancient metalwork, 
emphasizes variety of colour from alloys, inlays, burnishing, 
or patina. Thus the waves on the edge should be bright silver, 
the harvests should bc bright gold, and, in the dance, the men 
have gold swords hung on silver belts. 
It has been suggested that the shield origivated in a plan 
for plate to be prcscnted to the duke of wellington and this 
is not impossible when it is recalled that the `Ijadics of Great 
Britain' erected a colossal bronze statue of Achilles as a tribute 
to the duke. Certainly the similarly large and elaborate 
storiated shield commissioned in 1814 by the Merchants and 
Bankers of the City of I.ondon for presentation to the duke 
of wellington (today in Apsley House) and made for Green, 
Ward and Green, the chief rivals of Rundell, Bridge and 
Rundell, by Benjamin Smith after designs by Thomas 
Stothard, a friend of Flaxman, must have been a significant 
stimulus since it was being made in the same period-it seems 
in fact to have been completed a little later. And it is probable 
that Flaxman had hoped to secure this commission. 
Nevertheless the first rcfercnccs to the shield are still earlier 
in date. A letter from the firm dated 29 October 1810 (on 
fo. 98 of the volume of autograph letters to William Hayley 
in the Fitzwilliam Museum) mentions a payment of 15 
guineas for three drawings and one of loo guineas `for the 
beautiful design of the shield of Achilles', adding `we do not 
attempt to put a price upon that excellent performance'. The 
letter continues, `we trust that Mr Theed under the occasional 
inspection, which you have been kind enough to promise, will 
be able to execute to your satisfaction this exquisite design'. 
The plan for Theed to execute the model must have been 
abandoned and the whole idea revised for in a letter of 8 
September 1814 Flaxman's wife wrote that he had 
`recommcnc'd the model of the famous shield upon a larger 
plan' (ibid. fo. 47). 
Flaxman entered £200 in his ledger `on account of shield 
of Achilles' on 4 January 1817-it is clear, however, from 
other sources that work on the revised commission 
Commenced considerably earlier. He recorded below this 
entry that he had been paid £525 (i.c. 500 guineas) on 20 
January 1818 for the `model' (MS ledger in the Montgomery 
Library, Columbia University, New York, p. 93, using page 
numbers at tops of pages, nearest the binding). There are no 
entries in Flaxman's ledger for Rundell, Bridge and Rundell 
with an earlier date, but subsequent entries continue to the 
cnd of his life. These other entries are specifically for `sketches', 
`drawings', or `designs') (e.g. `skctch for an ink stand', `two 
drawings of a candelabrum for the Queen') and all recorded 
payments are for no more than 8 guineas with two exceptions: 
a payment of 20 guineas made on 10 January 1818 for `2 bas 
reliefs for Mr. Kemble's cupndelivered to Mr. Storr' and 
one for `6 designs for the Ambassadors Box' for which hc 
received 25 guincas on 25 December 1825. The number of 
drawings supplied is an adequate explanation for the high 
payment in the second case, but in the first one might suspect 
that a model was involved. J. T. Smith, who was well 
acquainted with the circumstances of the Kemble 
prcsenta.don, noccd (Nollchens and His Times (-Ijondon, 
1828), ii. 448) that Flaxman did not take payment for his 
drawings in this case but also noted that the models were 
made by his pupil E. H. Baily (who was a major source for 
his information on Flaxman), so Flaxman was probably 
accepting payment on Baily's behalf. It would seem then that 
Flaxman did not become chief modeller to Rundell, Bridge 
and Rundell as has been claimed (D. Irwin, Jo¢» F/¢I¥ow¢" 
(London, 1979), 194) but may only have modelled the S4¢.c/d 
a/Ac¢¢.//cf for the firm. Certainly the payments for the S4¢.c/d 
a/Ac4¢.//cf arc altogether exceptional. 
It is reasonable to assume that the models for the shield 
would have been made in clay or wax from which a plaster 
cast would have been taken. J. T. Smith, presumably relying 
on Baily's account, wrote that Flaxman `first modelled the 
general design, without attending minutely to the rcspcctive 
parts; it was then moulded in compartments, and cast in 
plaster, and he afterwards finished it up by cutting away to 
that inimitable height of excellence, which enabled his spirited 
employers to produce the splendid casts of it in silver Slt . . .' 
(op. cit. 446). It must have been of a special type of gesso 
for plaster of Paris cannot safely be tooled. This model was 
either in five parts or was divided into five parts-uter rim, 
inner circle, and three sections of frieze-from which moulds 
were made. From these moulds silver, bronze, and plaster 
casts could be made. The casts in silver and bronze would 
have required extensive tooling and it was doubtless for this 
reason that Flaxman also supplied finished drawings. 
Four silver Slt casts were made of the shield. One had been 
cast by late September 1819 and was reported as so perfect 
that little finishing was needed. As S. Bury and M. Snodin in 
`The Shield of Achilles', A77 ¢f A"c£;o#, So£¢Gky IP83-1984 
(I.ondon, 1984) 274-83, point out, this is likely to have been 
the cast with the date letter for 1821-2 made for King Gcorgc 
IV (which remains in the Royal Collection). It was on display 
at the Coronation Banquet in July 1821. Another with the 
same date letter was made for the duke of York (today in the 
Huntington Art Museum and Library, California). Two more 
were made with the date letter for 18234, one for the 2nd 
earl of I.onsdale (today at Anglesey Abbey, National Trust) 
65
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
and another for the duke of Northumberland (sold at 
Sotheby.s, I.ondon, 3 May 1984, lot 124, exhibited Christic's, 
I.ondon, January 1990, as part of the Al-Tajir Collection). In 
addition a linitcd edition of plaster casts, probably only three, 
were made-ne of these remains with the Royal Academy, 
another belonged to John Gawlcr Bridge, and a third 
belonged to Sir Thomas Lawrence. (A. Cunningham, £¢.t7cJ 
Of the British Painters, Scttlptors and Architects, .iri (`hondon. 
1833), 3524, says that three only were made and that these 
belonged to the Academy, to the artist himself, and to 
I.awrence. ) The value attached to these is clearly demonstrated 
by the fact that I.awrence's cast was bought by Rundell, 
doubtless worried about the opportunities for piracy it 
provided, at Lawrence's sale, Christie's, 6 July 1830, lot 68, 
for the surprisingly high price of fl3. 2j.. 6¢. This is likely to 
be the war-damaged cast presented to the British Museum by 
the firm. (There must also have been aftercasts of which the 
bronzed plaster which was exhibited at the Heim Gallery in 
the spring of 1976, no. 92, was surely an example.) 
It is not known when the bronzes were cast but it is possible 
that this did not take place until the 1830s. That the bronzes 
were finished by Pitts is clear from the evidence given by 
George Foggo to a Select Committee on Arts and 
Architecture in 1835 (cited by Bury and Snodin, pp. 52-3). 
The job involved the fitting of separately cast horse's legs and 
was highly complex. It is said that Pitts also worked on the 
chasing of the silver Slt versions of the S¢G.c/d a/Ac4¢.//cf and 
also on the Wellington shield: he was indeed better known 
for his work as a silver chaser (his father John Pitts, to whom 
hc was apprenticed, was also a chaser) than for work on 
bronze, but he was a versatile artist and was also responsible 
for work in stucco at Buckingham Palace. In any case it is 
remarkable how the tooling and construction of both the 
bronze versions is identical in character to the methods 
employed for the silver Slt ones. 
Pitts himself was said to have been working on a S4¢.c/d a/ 
Ac"e¢f when hc died and the influence of Flaxman's shield 
was felt particularly in the middle years of the nineteenth 
century with such works as the chiselled steel shield of Italian 
poetry of c.185l by Antoine Vechte (Victoria and Albcrt 
Museum 1482-1852) or the electrotype Milton shield of 
1867 by Vechte's pupil I.eonard Morel-Ladeuil. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably foundry of J. W. Singer and Sons, Frome, Somersct 
After Edward Onslow FORD ( 1852-1901) 
494. Folly 
48.7 cms. (height including integral rock-work base); 10.6 cms. 
(diameter of rock-work base); 2.8 cms. (height of serpentine 
base); 12.5 cms. (diameter of serpentine base) 
Bronze with a black vanish in places slightly green and bl.own. The 
varnish is chipped in small areas on the rock-work base. Hollow, 
probably lost-wax, cast. Either the figure is cast separately from the 
rock-work base or remains filled with core: the hollow interior does 
not extend to the figure's legs. There appears to be a rectangular 
patch of metal inserted behind the knee of the figure's right leg 
(this could bc part of an angular join). 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R. Brocklebank in 1927. No. 9, `a 
nude figure of a Nymph standing on rockwork 19" high by 
A. Gilbcrt', in Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927. 
Ford had received his artistic education in Antwerp and 
Munich. Trained as a painter, he tuned his attention to 
sculpture in the mid-1870s and his first great success was 
Fo//y, modelled 1885nd and exhibited at the Royal Academy 
in 1886 as a large bronze statuette, 3 ft hich, which was the 
Chantrey purchase (now Tate Ganery reserve). Another cast 
of this size is in the National Gauery of scotland, Edinburgh. 
A third was in the autumn of 1989 with the dealers Edric 
van Vredcnburgh and Dick Coats. This last cast is 
distinguished by the most extraordinary trcatmcnt of the hair 
as a mass of fine wire. The smaller casts of the size of the 
Ashmolcan's are far more common: there is one in the I.ady 
Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight, one was at Sothcby's, 
Ijondon, 16 April 1986, lot 258, and another was recently 
on the art market, dated 1893 but these smaller casts must 
have been made from a model available before 31 May 1890 
when the figure was said, in an article on small bronzcs in the 
S¢f#rdyRcp¢.era7,tohavcbecnavallablcinaneditionpublished 
by Arthur Leslic Collie, of 398 Bond St, who seems to have 
been associated with the establishment of lost-wax bronze 
casting by the Singer firm under the direction of Herbert 
Singer in 1888, or shortly before. 
There is an admirable account of the statuette's character, 
antcccdcnts, and appeal in Susan Beattie's 777c NGw Sc#/P£"7G 
(I.ondon and New Haven, Conn.,1983),153-5, to which 
one might only add the possible influence of the most 
attractive ( but least finiliar today) of I,ord Leighton's bronze 
figures, his bathing girl alarmed by a frog, NCG¢/cff 4/¢yxpf 
(a cast of which in the Victoria and Albcr[ Museum,1054- 
1905, is inscribed as published by Collie in November 1891, 
but which was certainly known before then). 
67
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
68 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
After Dame Elisabeth FRINK (b. 1930) 
495. Mirage 
37.6 cms. (height including integral plinth); 0.6 cms. (height of 
plinth); 20.5 cms. (length of plinth); 6.1 cms. (width of plinth) 
Aluminium. Solid, lost-wax, cast. Scratched `FRINK 4/7' on one side 
of the upper surface of the integra.I plinth. `pRESENTED By / MR. R. 
ALISDAIR (J¢.c) MCALPINE / 1969-136' painted in red on the 
underside of the plinth. A tape stamped `A 1839' is also stuck there. 
Given by Alistair MCAlpine of Fawley (now I.ord MCAlpine of west 
Grccn) in 1969. ReSstered on 4 July 1969. 
The Sft came soon after the purchase by the Dcpartmcnt of 
the large drawing A4l¢7e ¢»¢ b#// from an exhibition of Frink's 
work at the Waddington Gancries, Cork Street. Ijord 
MCAlpine's cncouragcmcnt of the Museum's interest in 
modem art was to lead to his donation of the MCAlpine 
Gallery, completed in 1973. 
69
BRITISH SCULI'TURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
George GARRARD ARA ( 1760-1826) 
496. Thoroughbred stallion rearing 
10.6 cms. (height); 14.9 cms. (from tail to off-fore hoof); 2.4 cms. 
(height of plinth); 10.5 cms. (length of plinth); 7 cms. (width of 
plinth) 
Bronze with a dark brown varnish, chestnut where slightly worn, 
chipped in some places. Yellow metal is revealed in small patches 
on salient parts of tail and mane. Presumably hollow cast. There is 
much evidence of chiselling and punching. The tail is cast separately. 
There is a seam across the horse's chest. Stamped `G. GARRARD. ARA' 
on the belly of the horse. Bolted by the rear hoofs to a plinth of 
white marble. The underside of the plinth is inscribed by the former 
ouncr in pencil: ` 13 years / 1945 / May 1 / 1958'; `GARRARD ARA 
1760-1826'. 
Given by Mrs Gcrda Winser of Dean Buildings, Chipping Norton, 
on 9 November 1988. Purchased by her on I May 1945 for £1 
from a dealer who had recently obtained it, together with a clock, 
as a lot in a house sale of a descendant of the sculptor in Chipping 
Norton. Given by her to her late husband on their thirteenth 
wedding anniversary. 
70 
Garrard began his career as an animal painter, the pupn and 
a son-in-law of Sawrcy Gilpin. He exhibited paintings at the 
Academy from 1781 but in 1795 began to exhibit models of 
aninals-mostly British agricultural specimens, but also some 
more exotic examples. He exhibited a bust of a young lady in 
1801 and thereafter frequently exhibited portrait busts, some 
of them in marble. He showed some poetic subjects and 
strove, with little success, to obtain commissions for large 
monumental works, but was always chiefly esteemed for his 
small animal studies and portraits. It is not known when he 
began to specialize in bronze versions of such works but both 
statuettes and small busts in this medium were exhibited by 
him at the Royal Academy from 1812 onwards. Whether he 
was rcsponsiblc for the casting himself is not known, but hc 
had long been interested in editing his work in plaster and 
had been very active in petitioning Parliament for a Bin to 
secure copyright in sculpture (the Act passed in 1798-38 
Geo.Ill, c. 71). This bronze must date from after 1800 in 
which year he was elcctcd an Associate of the Royal Academy. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknown foundry 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
497. Perseus arning 
36.4 cms. (height, including integral bronze base); 3 cms. (height 
of integral bronze base); 11.6 cms. (diameter of bronze base) 
Bronze with a dark green to black patina. Hollow, sand-cast, in 
pieces. The arms have been separately cast but the joins arc hard to 
perceive. The figure is bolted to a separately cast circular bronze 
base. There is a paper label on the underside of the base inscribed 
`Brocklebank Bequcst' together with a small circular lead seal 
stamped with a pair of ampersands. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
Acquired by him before 23 Septcmbcr 1910. No. 22 in Andrew 
Shirley's receipt of January 1927 as `Perseus . . .13" '. 
The Pgrfc#J was modelled in 1880 by Gilbert in Rome 
apparently soon after hc had seen Cellini's cclcbratcd bronze 
of the same hero in Florence and was cast in the spring of 
1881 also in Rome. `As at that time my whole thoughts were 
of my artistic equipment for the future, I conceived the idea 
that Perseus bcforc becoming a hero was a mere mortal, and 
that hc had to look to his equipment', Gnbcrt recalled more 
than twenty years later. This account of his motivation, 
distorted by the preoccupation with his own genius which 
obsessed him as his artistic powers began to falter, has perhaps 
been treated with too much respect. Cellini's PGrJc#J may well 
have been his inspiration but the elegant tension of the figure 
recalls certain late sixtccnth-century bronzes such as the female 
Virtue floggivg Vice on the Borghese inkstand (scc No. 224) 
then attributed to Cellini. 
Gilbert's bronze was exhibited at the Grosvenor Gallery in 
1882 (no. 380) and again at the Paris Salon in the following 
year (no. 3700) and was enormously admired. It is not known 
when the figure began to be reproduced fiill-size (as here, 
No. 498), half-size (as in this case); and in miniature (as here, 
No. 499), with minor differences in the shape of the sword 
blade and in the character of sword belt, sword hilt, helmet 
wings, and foot wings. A cast was in the J. P. Heseltine 
Collection by 1887 when it was lent to Manchester City Art 
Gallery for exhibition, but the large editions are likely to 
belong to the last years of the ninctcenth century, or the first 
of the twentieth. 
This half-sized cast was the first which Brocklcbank 
acquired, and also much the finest, of the three hc cvcntually 
owned. It is identical with the version in the Fitzwilliam 
Museum which was exhibited at the Royal Academy 
cxhi+kjition .in \986-Alf red Gilbert: Sculptor and Goldsmith, 
no. 11-s a lost-wax cast. However, that version and this, 
hike the many others of this size that I have seen, have 
separately cast ams with joins (which can only be discerned 
on close examination) and these would bc surprising in a lost-wax 
cast at that date. Casts of the other sizes arc generally 
more obviously sand-casts, although some of the fiill-size 
bronzes such as the origival cxhibitcd version, no doubt 
Heseltine's, and the one from a private collection which was 
no. 10 in the Academy exhibition, arc cxccptions. The letters 
from Gilbert to Brocklebank in the Dcpartmcnt's archive 
reveal how preoccupied the sculptor was by what he claimed 
were pirated versions of the bronze. 
On 23 September 1910 in a letter mostly concerned with 
his group of Sf Gco#gc co7¢d#cfgd ky V¢.cfory (No. 512) Gilbert 
responded with suspicion to the news that his admirer had a 
cast of the PGrtc#f. 
I must tell you that if your Pcrseus is signed in Roman capitals thus 
ALFRED GILBERT the signature is none of my doing. I have seen a 
similar figure in the Kensington Museum and I have repudiated it 
publicly in 77/c TG.ovcj. I an taking steps to trace the author of this 
forgery of my name, and I am in a fair way to bring hin to book.- 
I do not contend that the works arc not from my model, but they 
are inferior productions, and feloniously signed. 
He also exprcsscd furious indignation concerning the version 
in the South Kensington Museum in another letter of I 
December-`I never signed that figure in an ostensible way 
. . . I am repudiating this spurious, or rather pirated 
production.' The version in the `Kensington Museum' is a 
half-size cast (36.5 cms. high) which is on display in the 
English primary gallcrics (Room 118) of the Victoria and 
Albert Museum. Its accession number is 1050-1904 and the 
Museum's records reveal that it was purchased for £68 7f.1d 
in 1904-asts of Tr¢gGdy ¢79d Coowcdy and of A# 
O#G7?.»gr fo HyowG„ were acquired at the same time. `A. Gilbert' 
is chiselled in the metal across the upper surface of the base 
beside the hero's right foot. Brocklebank evidently informed 
Gilbert that his version had no signature but did have a lead 
seal. Pacified, Gilbert, in a letter of 27 September 1910, 
replied, `As to the lead seal, if it is in facsimile with either of 
these impressions you must be satisfied and so must 1', and 
hc enclosed diagrams with one of which the ampersands on 
the seal on this bronze do indeed correspond. 
Some commentary on this correspondence is rcquircd. As 
is also clear from his references in the same letters to the 
V¢.cfory (No. 502), Gilbert was understandably upset by the 
profits being made, whilst he himself was in grave financial 
difficulties, by Bond Street dealers and the bronze foundries. 
However, if he consented, howcvcr reluctantly, to large 
editions being made, as it seems likely that he did, it would 
not be surprising if some of the founders or dealers had his 
name added cspccially after his `exile' in Brussels. `Signaturcs' 
cut in the metal after casting were not usually the 
responsibility of the artist whose name was involved (which is 
why the term is misleading and avoided in this catalogue). It 
must all the same have been infuriating for artists to see their 
names used in this manner without their consent. Gilbert 
certainly was infuriated and the manner in which he jumped 
to the wrong conclusion concerning Brocklcbank's bronze 
must suggest that he was not entirely reliable in his accusations. 
The `inferior' production in the Victoria and Albert Museum 
turns out not to be an aftcrcast as one might suppose or even 
71
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
a poorly finished cast but to be ridentical in quality to the 
authorized version in Brocklebank's collection. Other casts of 
Gilbert's work will be found to have the signature that so 
maddcncd hint-A" O#c7¢.79g fo HyowG» with the Fine Art 
Society, Bond Street, in February 1987 is an example-nd 
they are not works of inferior quality. 
72 
Unknown foundry, probably British 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
498. Perseus arming 
72.8 cms. (height including integral bronze base); 6.5 cms. 
(height of bronze base) 
Bronze with a chestnut patina, darker in the hollows. Hollow, sand-cast 
in pieces. Each leg and arm has been separately cast; the sword 
strap also fashioned separately. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
No. 12 in Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927 as `Pcrseus . . . 
25" revolving on marble ptinth'. 
One of thrcc versions of this figure from Brocklebank's 
collection. See No. 497. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknown foundry, probably British 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854~1934) 
499. Perseus arming 
14.5 cms. (height including integral socle); I.5 cms. (height of 
integral soclc); 5 cms. (diamctcr of base of integral socle); 
5.8 cms. (height of wooden pedestal); 7.8 cms. (diameter of base 
of wooden pedestal) 
Bronze with a warm chestnut patina. Hollow, sand-cast in pieces. 
Each arm is separately cast. The figure is fitted to a separately cast 
bronze socle and bolted to an ebonizcd wooden pedestal in the form 
of a truncated column on an octagonal plinth. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R. Brocklebank in November 1926. 
No.18 in Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927 as `Perseus . . . 
6" on ebonised plinth'. 
One of three versions of this figure from Brocklebank's 
collection. See No. 497. 
74 
Perhaps foundry of the Compagnic des Bronzes, Brussels 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT (1854-1934) 
500. Icarus 
51 cms. (height including wooden base in which integral bronze 
base is sunk); 2.8 cms. (height of wooden base); 17.2 cms. 
(dianetcr of wooden base ) 
Bronze with a deep chestnut patina slightly green in parts. Hollow 
cast in pieces. A join is just visible on the hero's right arm, above 
the strap, also, under magnification, on the other arm. A space under 
the hero's left foot is visible under magnification. This suggests that 
the base and arms were cast separately. A typewritten paper label 
pasted to the wooden base reads `Constantine lonidcs Collection'. 
Bequcathcd by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
Acquired by him after I January 1911 (when not listed in a letter 
bythesculptortoBrocklebankconccmingtheworksofhiswhich 
were in the latter's possession) and probably after 1913 (since it is 
unmentioned in the letters of 1911,1912, and 1913 by Gilbert to 
Brocklebank). Apparently acquired by Brocklebank from the 
collection of Constantinc lonides ( see label described above) whose 
collection was formed in ljondon in the 1880s and 1890s. No. 29 
3eggeresTans±:I:y:trhec;:tgos;:eTd:,T8;,9£7£s,.Astatuettcst 
I"% was commissioned in Perugia in the summer of 1882 
for £100 after the success of the PGzfG%J (Nos. 497-9) by 
Gilber['s keen admirer, the President of the Royal Academy, 
Ijord Leighton, who was then involved in making sculpture 
of his own (Nos. 532-3). The subject was left to the artist 
who thought first of Leighton's `penchant for classical 
subjects; it must bc something classical and appropriate for 
bronze . . . It flashed across me', Gilbert rccallcd, `that I was 
very ambitious: why not "Icarus" with his desire for flight' 
(I. MCAllister, A//#Gd G;/de# (Ijondon, 1929), 62). The 
origival bronze, modelled in Italy in 1883 and 1884 and 
incised `Rome 1884', is 106.7 cms. in height (the National 
Museum of wales, Cardiff) and was exhibited at the Royal 
Academy in 1884 (as no. 1855) to great acclaim. No figure 
made by a British sculptor before Gilbcrt's PG7fG%f possessed 
a comparable fomal or psycholoScal fascination: its sinuous 
line and tense grace are suggestive of complex thoughts and 
feelings in precarious balance. And the surface of the origival 
bronzcpossessesanervousvitalityunprecedentedinanywork 
cast in this country. 
The origival Jc¢owf was cast under Gilbert's own direction 
at the foundy of Sabatino de Angclis in Naples. It is unique 
and there is some reason to suppose that it was cast by the 
`direct mcthod' (the wax modelled over a prepared core) 
rather than by the usual indirect method of making the wax 
model from a mould of the oriSnal clay (or more hkcly from 
a mould of a plaster cast made from a mould of the origival 
clay)-see Duncan James, `Alfred Gilbert and the Use of 
Nineteenth-Century Founding Techniques' , in R. Dorment, -irlf red Gilliert: Sc;lptor ?nd qo.Idspeith (:Poryal r±_&_d=T!.:. 
Ijondon,1986), 234. Certainly the casting of the Jc¢y%f was 
regardedasquitcdistinctfromthatofGilbert'searlicrPGrfG%J. 
(The P„„ap however, contrary to the assumptions made in 
all recent literature, may never have been cast by the lost-wax 
process, even by the indirect method-see No. 497. ) 
The de Angelis foundry, which specialized in high quality 
reproductions of the antiquities in the Archaeoloalcal 
Museum, Naples (scc No. 5), seems, together with the 
foundry established by Vincenzo Gemito (discussed below), 
to have made Naples in the carly l880s one of the three chief 
European ccntrcs for casting by the lost-wax method, the 
other acclaimed foundries for this process being those of the 
Gonon finily in Paris (for which see No. 251 ) and of the 
Compagnic dcs Bronzes in Brussels. Publicity for the latter 
foundry had been provided, shortly before Jc¢rar was 
exhibited, by Gilbert's employer, teacher, and admirer Edgar 
Bochm, whose statuette of the famous race-horse Crceeo7'i7?c 
was exhibited at the Grosvenor Gallery in 1883 with a special 
note that it `has been cast at Brussels in the ancient "cire 
pcrduc" process, and is cast in one piece' (M. Stocker, Ray#/¢.¢ 
and Realist: The Life and Word Of Sir Jose2h Edgar Bochm 
(New York and I.ondon, 1988), 307-8 and nos. 3334). 
CrGaco7'7cc had been commissioned by Sir John Savilc Lumley 
(later I.ord Savile), the British consul in Belgum, whose 
interest in lost-wax casting prompted him to compile a report 
on the process for the Board of Trade (a copy, from the 
collection of C. D. E. Fortnum, is in the Ashmolean Library) 
which was published in modified form in the 47:c4¢.£#£, 31 
(1884),130-I and 140-1, 
During the late l880s and early l890s, the practice of lost-wax 
casting became far more common both in England and 
France. In England in 1888 J. W. Singer and Son built a new 
foundry at Fromc under Herbert Singer's direction which 
was suited to this method. It was introduced at the Thames 
Ditton foundry of Cox and Sons under the direction of James 
Moore shortly after 1890 (S. Beattie, T77c Ncil7 Sc„/Pf#rt7 
(I.ondon and New Haven, Conn.,1983),188 and 191). A 
Roman, Alessandro Parlanti, established a foundry in Parson's 
Grccn, Fulham, in the same years and Gilbert was closely 
associated with him although he also gave work to the 
Compagrie des Bronzes which was certainly his principal 
foundry after 1900. Either of these two latter foundries could 
have been responsible for the small edition of reductions of 
the origival Jc¢7.#f of which the Ashmolean's bronze is an 
example, but it is not likely that thcsc were lost-wax casts. 
On close investigation they are seen to have been composed 
of separately cast units which suggests the sand-cast process 
in which the Compagnie des Bronzes also excelled. 
According to the rccollcctions of w. Goscombc John not 
more than a dozen casts of the Jc¢7.#f in this size were made 
before the moulds were broken and Dormcnt (Royal Academy 
catalogue cited above, pp.Ilo-12) observes that it seems 
likely that they were all made before 1900. Two other casts 
from this edition are known, both of which wcrc included in 
the Royal Academy exhibition of 1986: a silvered version 
belongivg to the Fine Art Society and a version, identical in 
patina to the Ashmolcan's, belonSng to the Tate Gallery. The 
latter is incised in the back of the base with the artist's initials 
Within a circle and, unlike the Ashmolean and Fine Art Society 
casts, the forked tongue of the serpent attacking the bird on 
the base has not been broken off. 
The character of the naturalistic base with the bird and 
snake in the origival bronze is far more complex than in the 
reductions. It must represent, as has often been observed, a 
response to the French `animalicr' bronzes in the manner of 
Barye, but, more specifically, it is surely an exercise in the 
subject-matter with which Gonon had demonstrated his 
virtuosity in lost-wax casting (see No. 251 ): the textures of 
snake-skin and feathers and the fraSlity of serpent tongues 
and bird's legs represented an obvious challenge. Gilbert was 
intensely interested in ¢„¢.owe/¢.cr sculpture when in Paris in 
1878. Hc made many studies at the zoo all of which wcrc 
destroyed (MCAllister, op. cit., 49). If Gonon was important 
for Gilbert, so too, as seems not to have been previously 
pointed out, was Vincenzo Gemito by whose work no artist 
visiting Naples in the early l880s, least of all a sculptor 
especially interested in bronze casting, could fan to bc 
attracted. Gemito's own foundry, projected by the Belgian 
entrepreneur Baron Oscar de Mesnil in 1875, commenced 
production in 1883, the year in which Gilbert first had his 
bronzes cast in Naples. Contemporary with the Jc¢7'i¢¢J arc 
two heads made by Gilbert as experiments in lost-wax casting: 
the HG¢d a/¢gG.71/ (National Museum of wales, Cardiff), 
modelled in 1882, cast in 1883 and exhibited in that year at 
the Royal Academy (no. 1600, `Study of a Head'), and the 
He¢d a/a C¢Pr¢./f47cr7ce¢7?, modelled 1883 and exhibited in 
1884 with Jc¢r#f at the Royal Academy (no. 1699, `Study'), 
of which a later casting is in the National Gallery of victoria, 
Mclboumc (Royal Academy exhibition cited above, nos. 12 
and 14, pp.108-9). The second of these heads is very close 
to the bust of an old man made by Gcmito in the same 
period: in both every minute wrinkle of the skin is perfectly 
recorded (a cast of this bust was formerly on loan to the 
Cleveland Museum of Art,1174.78, and another was 
exhibited with the David Daniels Collection, Minneapolis 
Institute of Art, 1979-80). The subtle textures and colouring 
(especially the traces of gold in the hair) in Gilbert's Head a/ 
¢g¢.71/ recall such outstanding works by Gcmito as his 
P¢¢./ofoj)der'f ¢c¢d of 1883 ( Cleveland Museum of Art, 79.42) 
and the beautiful but plebeian character of the model (the 
`Srl' was the Roman nurse of Gilbert's child) is reminiscent 
of Gemito's use of urchins in his earliest and most famous 
works. 
75
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps foundry of Compagnie des Bronzes, Brussels 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
501. An Offering to Hymen 
29.55 cms. (height of bronze including base); I.45 cms. (height 
of lapis plinth); 7 cms. (diameter of lapis plinth) 
Bronze with a dark slightly green brown patina, worn, where handled 
around thighs and also at tip of nose, to a chestnut natural patina. 
The hapy base is of slightly darker brown patina. Hollow, probably 
lost-wax, cast. The small figure of Anteros, together with the sprig 
of rosemary, have been fashioned separately and soldered in place, 
The hapy base was probably cast separately. Figure and base arc 
bolted to a plinth of lapis lazuli. 
Bequeathed by the Rcvd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
Acquired before 28 June 1910. No. 21 in Andrew Shirley's receipt 
of January 1927 as `A statuette, Nude Female standing holding an 
effigy of an Angel' . 
Gilbert exhibited a large bronze version of this subject at the 
Grosvcnor Gallery in 1886, having modelled the figure, 
perhaps in the previous year, apparently emplo)ing Miss 
Pcttigrcw as his model. He might have had the idea a few 
years earlier in Rome; in any case, he seems to have `conccived 
of it as the third statue in the progression from Perscus to 
Icanis of adolcsccnts facing the passage from youth to 
maturity', as RIchard Dorment observes in his catalogue entry 
for the recently rediscovered bronze of 1886 in A//„cd G¢./de7¢.. 
Sc#/pfoy ¢„d Go/drow¢.£¢ (Royal Academy, London, 1986) 
(no.18, pp.112~14). On the other hand, the stiff pose, the 
attributes, and the base reflect a reaction away from his earlier 
cxcrciscs in complex torsion, a deeper interest in the hicratic 
and symbolic (as distinct from allegorical narrative), and a 
novel fascination with grotesque `cinqueccnto' ornament, 
soon to develop into an obsession. It is not known when 
small casts such as that in the Ashmolean were first made but 
it was probably during the first decade of the twentieth century. 
In these small versions the figure (which is conceived of as 
standing before the altar of the god of marriage) is given a 
variety of votive offerings sometimes in silver, sometimes in 
copper. These include a chalice, a rose, a putto with an inverted 
torch, a sprig of rosemary (as here), and a figure of Antcros 
(as here). The A7¢fg7iof is a reduction of a figure, derived from 
the Jc¢7#f (see No. 500), which Gilbert made in 1893. The 
small O#G"."g fo H)iowe" in the City Art Gallery, Manchester 
(no. 19 in the Royal Academy exhibition) is documented as 
bought from Messrs Brown and Phillips in 1912. The version 
in the Victoria and Albert (79-1904) was acquired in 1904. 
The Ashmolean's version was acquired before 28 June 1910. 
Gilbert, writing to Brocklcbank from Faulconer's Hotel, 
I.ondon, on that date in a letter mostly about a S£ Gco%ge 
(see No. 506), commented, `1 an sorry you have bought the 
sman "Offering to Hymen", for I fear you have paid an 
excessive price for it while I might have found you an example 
taken direct from my origival model, and chased by myself, 
at a modcratc price'. This would suggest that it was a recent 
Purchase by Brocklebank, also that quite a few casts were 
then available on the art market. It might be taken-indccd 
was meant to be taken-as an allegation that some of these 
were of inferior quality, and that Gilbert had a few specially 
finished examples, but it was in the sculptor's interests to sell 
direct to Brocklebank and he was also prey to anxieties 
concerning the sale of his bronzes in `Bond Strect' (scc No. 
497) which may not have been based on a just perception of 
lower standards but motivated by rescntmcnt at the profits in 
which he had no share.
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps foundry of Compagnie des Bronzcs, Brussels 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
5o2. Victory 
48.5 cms. (height including entire base and uppermost frond of 
palm); 21.5 cms. (height of figure from big toe to crown of 
head); 10.2 cms. (height of base); 12.9cms. (diameter of base) 
Bronze with a slightly green-black patina worn to chestnut in some 
salient folds of drapery. Hollow, probably lost-wax, cast. The raised 
right am and most of the trumpet are both cast separately (the joins 
are hardly visible) and the palm (of copper?) is fashioned separately. 
There is a small hole in the drapery between the feet. The figure is 
mounted on a ball of dark brown and white (? AIgcrian) onyx and 
a base of ebohized wood consisting of a turned and waisted soclc 
on an octagonal plinth. 
Bequeathed by the Rcvd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
Bought by him before 22 July 1910 `in Bond St.'. No. 28 in Andrew 
Shirley's receipt of January 1927 as `Victory'. 
Gilbert's great Jubilee monument to Queen Victoria, 
presented to the City of winchester by William Ingham 
Bywater, High Sheriff of Hampshirc, was exhibited as a 
bronzed plaster at Winchester on 17 August 1887 and then 
shown again at the Royal Academy Exhibition in 1888. The 
figure of victory crowning the orb was perhaps the most 
notable of the many inventive accessories and details with 
which the figure and throne bristlcd. The Victory on the 
origival bronze was wrenched from the queen's grasp by a 
vandal and has not been replaced, but Gilbert had others cast 
as independent works of art, exhibiting a statuette in silver at 
the Royal Academy exhibition in 1891 (no. 2069). It is not 
certain when the bronze statuettes were first edited, but 
perhaps not until more than a decade after this. The version 
in the Victoria and Albert Museum ( 1050-1905), which is 
identical with the Ashmolean's, was acquired in 1905. In 
1903 Gnbcrt was to)ing with the idea of making a large 
version of the figure to serve as a Boer War memorial. In 
reading Gflbert's correspondence with Brocklcbank on this 
subject it is important to bear in mind that Brocklebank 
eventually owned two versions of the statuette, the other 
version being smaller and Slded. The Ashmolean's bronze 
was exhibited at the Royal Academy exhibition 4//#G¢ G£./4G7¢.. 
Sc#/p}or a"d Go/drow¢.£¢ ( 1986) as no. 34 with the incorrect 
infomation that it was purchased from the artist in 1911 and 
can therefore be dated to 1910. It seems in fact to have been 
purchased in 1910. 
On 20 January 1910 Gilbert informed Brocklebank that he 
was able to let him have a VG.cfo7)+`not the small one you 
saw here but the origival size'. In his next letter of 30 January 
hc wrote, 
I an grateful to you for your attitude towards the pirated copies of 
my work. I hope when you see the example of the original size 
which I hope to send ere long together with the St. George that 
you will not regret your decision-meanwhile you will be doing me 
a great favour if you will let it be well and generally known that these 
Bond Street reproductions arc none other than pirated copies of 
my work. 
78 
The next reference to a V¢.cfory comes in a letter of 28 June 
1910: `1 have also a small "Victory" equally well produced, 
which I will send with the other figure, of course-nly for 
your approval. ' Meanwhile, however, Brocklebank had 
acquired a VG.cfory elsewhcrc. On 22 July Gilbert wrote: `In 
your last letter I understood you to say that you had already 
bought a small "Victory" in Bond Street so I put aside the 
one I intended for you, as no longer required.' On 28 July 
he pressed Brocklcbank for an explanation: `With regard to 
my mention of a Victory in my letter. I am awaiting your 
reply so that I may well understand your allusion to the said 
"Victory", after what I understood you to say as to your 
purchase of an example in Bond Street.' On 22 September hc 
wrote, `1 cannot say that I am much amused, though 
particularly interested, at the news you give me, that you have 
received a copy of my small Victory. I am rather saddened, 
at the thought, that while I am struggling to live by my work, 
others should be living upon the fruits of my labour.' 
However, Brocklebank seems to have disarmed Gilbert with 
praise for the work and a rcqucst for advice over cleaning 
and polishing it, and Gilbert rcphed on 27 September 1910, 
As to the little Victory (like all triumphs) it only wants nursing and 
caressing with a silk handkerchief, or something soft, from time to 
time. A little bees wax-in place of butter or oilngcntly rubbed on 
will keep the colour for a very long time, and the Victory will shine 
on all its contours, as though clad in light. 
On New Year's Day 1911 Gilbert responded to a letter 
expressing gcncral thanks and gratitude, 
You say that of the four statuettes you have of mine the one most 
admired is `Victory'. You are not aware possibly that [its?] apparent 
joyousness, is due to the fact that it was conceived and executed 
during the very few hours of happiness, I have known, in a now, 
almost long, and eventful life. Even the original, brought mc sorrow. 
I am afroid that my whole being has leant to be philosophical rather 
than sanguine, as it was once. I lived then to work, now I work to 
live for a pittance. 
It is unlikely that the little V¢.cfory acquired in Bond Street 
is to be identified as the gilded version now lost (No. 503): 
above au, the application of wax would bc more appropriate 
for an unSlded patina. It is odd that Gilbert docs not refer 
to two versions in his letter of 1911. It seems likely au the 
same that the Slded version was acquired at the same time 
and Gilbert's letters imply that the model was available in two 
sizes. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
80 
Unknown foundry 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
503. Victory (untraced) 
Said to have been 9" high. 
Metal, probably bronze, `heavily-dlt'. 
BequeathedbytheRevdJ.W.RBrocklebankinNovembcr1926. 
Probably acquired by him in 1910 or 1911. No.19 on Andrew 
Shirley's receipt of 1927 as `A statuette (gilt) Victory standing on a 
sphere,. 
ThiswaspresunablyaversionofthcVjcforyalsorepresented 
in Brocklebank's collection in unorded form. For the 
probable purchase of this bronze from Gilbert in 1910 or 
1911 see No. 511. The date when it was lost is unknown, 
but it may be safely asserted that it would have been most 
unlikely to have gone astray under the scrupulous 
housekeeping of C. F. Ben (Keeper 1908-31). A handwritten 
note by Ion ljowe in one of the bronze stores dated 29 
Januay 1968 records that the heavily gilt variant of Vjc}ory 
was not `seen'-i.e. was not found-when Charles Handlcy 
Read `carne to see the bronzes'. 
Probably foundry of Compagnie des Bronzes, Brussels 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
504. Literature (Wisdom) 
22.7 cms. (height of figure); 3.25 cms. (height of bronze base); 
10.5 cms. (dia.meter of base) 
Bronze with a very dark green and grey patina won on some edges 
of drapery to the yellow metal. Hollow, probably lost-wax, cast in 
pieces. The scroll with the hands was cast separately, as was the base. 
Some white plaster remains under the upper fold of the scroll. 
Inscribed on a paper label under the base in the sculptor's hand are 
the words: `REPLICA OF STAT ON THRONE OF / Q. VICTORIA 
MEMORIAL AT WINCHESTER / A GILBERT' . 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R. Brocklebank in November 1926. 
Probably acquired by him after 1912. No. 20 in Andrew Shirley's 
rcccipt of January 1927 as `a statuette, Literature, holding a scroll 
offame'. 
The figure is one of the Virtues modelled in 1887 and 
exhibited in Winchcster on 17 August that year as a pan of 
the throne of the Jubilee memorial for Queen Victoria (see 
also no. 502). It is placed on the rear of the throne at top 
left (see the illustration in M. H. Spielmann, Br¢.f¢.j4 Sc#/Pf#re 
fli»d Sc#/pforf a/ rodry ( I.ondon, 1901 ), 82). Having made all 
his earliest figure sculpture (PcrJc#J, Jc¢7':#f, and A» O#Gr¢.cog 
fo HyowG") nude Gilbert became fascinated by heavy drapery 
and by armour in the later l880s. This figure was anticipated 
by the similarly waxy and voluminous drapery and scroll of the 
personification of Zeal in the memorial to Henry Fawcctt of 
1885-7 crcctcd in Westminster Abbey where his first armour-clad 
figure, Fortitude, also features. 
L¢.£G7¢f#rc was cast as a separate statuette by the Compagnie 
des Bronzes, Brussels, in 1910, but some casts seem to have 
been available earlier and some of these might even have been 
cast at the same time as the original. Richard Dorment quotes 
an entry in the diary of George Gilbert on 23 June 1906 
concerning a cast with the dealer Horace Littlcjohn of the 
John Baillie Gallery, 54 Baker Strcct, Ijondon (see 4//rgd 
Gilbert: Sculptor and Goldsmith (Ftoryal Alcaideny , hondon, 
1986), no. 35, p.130). The casts are rare and no other 
versions are known to me (excepting that on the throne 
itself). There is no reference to L¢.£Gr#£„rg in Gflbcrt's letters 
to Brocklebank during the period 1910-12 and it is likely to 
have been acquired after the latter year. 
81
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps foundry of Compagnie des Bronzes, Brussels 
After Sir Alfrcd GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
505. Comedy and Tragedy 
(`Sic vitae') 
66.6 cms. (height of bronze); 6.3 cms. (height of base); 15 cms. 
(diameter of base ) 
Bronze with a dark green and brown patina, worn to golden brown 
in salient areas of hair and hat. Hollow, probably sand-cast, in 
pieces. Both arms and the mask were apparently cast together as one 
separate piece, the joins in both biceps being evident; the figure's 
right leg is also separately cast but almost invisibly joined. The figure 
is bolted to its orictnal spinachy serpentine base consisting of a 
turned, waistcd, soclc set on an octagonal plinth also of serpentine. 
This base is cracked but was mended August 1988 when the 
sculpture was also mounted on a spiral column of pc7itzc dG. P#¢£o, 
presumably Italian and of c.1880. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R. Brocklcbank in November 1926. 
No. 8 in Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927: `A statuette 
male figure symbolising Tragedy'. Ijong kept in Museum store; 
placed on display in the redecorated Combe Gallery in August 1988. 
The figure depicts the prop boy in the classical theatre stung 
by a bee as he hastens to the stage with a comic mask. The 
title comes from W. S. Gilbcrt's popular one-act play. The 
model was Angelo Colorossi (who is also immortalized in 
Gilbcrt's EroJ). A letter cited by Richard Dormcnt in the 
catalogue of the Royal Academy exhibition A//7.cd G¢./der£.. 
Sculptor and Goldsmith Of \986 (no. 22, p. \\7) reveals that 
-rf u*` -.._-i 
i-==--.-. 
work on the figure began on 2 February 1891. It was exhibited 
as a polychromed plaster at the Royal Academy in 1892 (as 
no. 2004), and, probably soon afterwards, was cast in bronze. 
The oridnal size (presumably corresponding with the 
exhibited plaster) is that of the version in the Ashmolean, of 
which many examples exist (among them examples in the 
following public couections: National Gallery of scotland, 
no. 2287-xhibited in the exhibition cited above; Leeds City 
Art Gallery; Nottingham City Art Gallery). Still more 
common arc half-size versions many of which include the bee 
(or included it-a hole often remains). These were made by 
the Compagnie des Bronzes in Brussels in the first decade of 
the twentieth century-at least that in the National Gallery 
of Art in Washington ( 1984.67. I ) is documcntcd as made 
there in 1905. The Victoria and Albcrt Museum acquired its 
small bronze of this size in 1904 (78-1904). Comparison of 
these two however immediately reveals a problem for the 
Washington bronze is a lost-wax cast, apparently in one piece, 
with a vibrant surface, whereas the latter, and all others that 
I have examined with dealers and auctioneers (among these 
those sold Sotheby's, I.ondon, 23 June 1987, lot 83, and 
Sotheby's, I.ondon, 26 November 1986, lot 59), are made 
up of pieces, like the larger version catalogued here, and are 
sand-casts. The Washington cast also has a different form of 
small round integral bronze base, being higher and consisting 
of a shallow dome on spreading mouldings. 
83
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry of the Compagnie des Bronzes, Brussels 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
506. St George 
47.5 cms. (height); 26 cms. (width of base) 
Bronze with a dull black patina worn to chestnut in some salient 
parts. Hollow, sand-cast, in sixteen pieces: helmet, head, shoulder 
greaves (2), arms (2), hands (2), torso, legs (2), thigh protectors 
(2), knee protectors (2), base. The shoulder armour to the figure's 
right is loose. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R. Brocklcbank in 1927. No. 14 in 
Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927: `St. George, standing 
holding sword with crucifix'. Purchased by Brocklebank from Gilbert 
in 1910 (see below). 
The figure was invented by Gilbert as one of the saints for 
the niches of the grille for the tomb-chest supporting the 
effigy of the duke of clarence in the chapel of windsor Castle. 
The duke, who was the first son of the prince of wales, died 
on 14 January 1892; the commission was given to Gilbert at 
Sandringham by the prince on 23-5 January and the first 
model approved by him in Ijondon before the end of the 
month. The larger model which was completed for the Royal 
Academy exhibition in 1894 was far more elaborate and 
included the grille which Gilbert seems to have scttlcd on 
early in 1893. Work on the tomb contributed to Gilbcrt's 
banluniptcy; his expedients to avoid this, together with his 
procrastination and obsessive elaboration on the tomb, led to 
a break with his royal patron and he did not return from exile 
in Brugcs to complete the work until bidden to do so by 
George V in 1926-the final figures wcrc in place in 1928. 
The first figure of Sf Gco#gc was cast by George Broad and 
Son in `white metal': the hands and head were of ivory, as 
was also the case with the effigy of the prince himself. The Sf 
GGo7igc was dclivercd to the prince and princess of wales at 
Sandringham on 10 November 1895 as a private domestic 
memorial to their son (it is now in St Mary Magdalene, 
Sandringham). This reveals that Gilbert, from the first, 
considered the figure acceptable as an independent sculpture, 
although the wide spreading base, in which the scaly skin and 
coils and claws of the dragon are involved, was devised for 
the special setting of the grille where the wings and draperies 
of attendant angels below and the crowning framework above 
continue its swirling foms. (The very earliest idea for the Sf 
Geokge, rcpresentcd by a drawing in body colours and gold 
leaf, does not have such a base.) The version for the tomb 
grille itself, also with ivory hands and head, the rest cast in 
aluminium, was set in place in Windsor in March 1898 (R. 
Dorrne". Alf red Gilbert: Sculpror and Goldsmith (Riayal 
Academy, Ijondon, 1986),154nd2). 
An interest in fancifully armoured figures, as also in 
voluminous draped figures, and in figures concealed by, and 
confused with, vegetation, which replaced Gilbert's early use 
of the nude, may all be traced to his work on the Fawcett 
memorial in Wcstminstcr Abbey, commissioned in April 1885 
and unveiled in January 1887 (ibid.124-5). The figure of a 
84 
knight representing Fortitude there was followed by the St. 
George on the Jubilcc Epergne, commissioned in 1887, 
completed in 1890, and by the knight in armour on the de 
Vesci seal, commissioned January 1891 and completed 1896 
(ibid., nos. 53 and 59, pp.144-5, 148-9). Whereas Ghbert 
had been fascinated by lost-wax casting he seems also to have 
been interested in the way that sand-casts of numerous picccs 
might be considered especiauy appropriate for a 
representation of a suit of armour which after all was itself a 
composite and jointed metal creation. The cast set up at 
Windsor in 1898 was probably made by the Compagrie des 
Bronzcs in Brussels. They were certainly responsible for two 
casts, with metal, rather than ivory, heads and hands, which 
Gilbert had made less than twelve months afterwards-nc 
of these (of aluminium, today in the Cecfl Higgivs Art Gallery, 
Bedford) was sent to Sir William Agnew on 8 February 1899, 
the other (of bronze, today in a private collection) was ready 
soon afterwards and sold to Robert Dunthome (ibid. 163- 
4, mos. 71, 72). The casting patterns used by the foundry to 
fom the sand moulds survive (ibid. 161, no. 68). How many 
subsequent versions in bronze were made is not certain but 
at least four seem to be recorded. 
Brocklebank called on Gilbert in Bruges on 9 December 
1909 but the sculptor was ill and unable to scc him. 
Brocklebank (together with his brother and sister-in-law who 
wcrc with hin) invited Gilbert to supper on 11 December 
and then again on 2 January 1910. In a letter to Brocklebank 
(by then at Fcify House, Warminster) on 16 January 1910 
Gilbert wrote that `sincc your visit I have put in hand the 
execution of the statucttc of st. George which you were good 
enough to commission, and I hope to be able to dclivcry it 
to you very shortly'. A new paragraph opened defensively: 
You appeared to think that the price I name,-£100-was 
excessive.-May I point out, that although it is in the main, a 
reproduction, it is really, other, for all the accessories, such as the 
sword, the base, ctcetera, demand special work, seeing that I have 
no models of these details, and must therefore remake them. Your 
version then will be unique, though in general features it will 
resemble the original. As to the St. Hubert with the Stag [a figure 
also planned for the tomb of the duke of Clarence] I should be glad 
of your decision. Its reproduction will bc formed by the same 
considerations,-both figures will be signed by me, with a special 
mark. 
This letter was certainly disingenuous. Comparison with the 
casts of 1899 and the existence of the casting patterns makes 
it clear that the extent of special work was exaggerated, and 
in the event it was only the sword which was specially 
modelled for Brocklebank's version. 
Gilbert's next letter to Brocklebank, addressed to Hinside, 
Warminster, was dated 20 January 1910. `Sincc you arc good 
enough to say that you arc likely to consider the purchase of 
another figure, if the first satisfies you, I accept your terms 
for the "St. George", though its sale at the price you offer 
[prcsumably something like £80] would but barely 
remuncratc me for all the extra work its preparation entails to 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
85
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
make it unlike in detail its prcdeccssors, to say nothing of the 
actual cost of production, were I to give it you down. I feel 
quite confident of giving you satisfaction however through 
the St. George.-As to the ``St. Hubert" or the "Virgin" 
which you have mistaken for St. Clara, I could not possibly 
give you for the same sum, for the double reason, lst I am 
not free at present to reproduce them, and 2dly were I so, 
they each of them cost me more to produce [than the sum in 
question]. I can however let you have a "Victory"-not the 
small one you saw here but the original size, simultaneously 
with the "St. George".' His next letter of 30 January concerns 
the V¢.cfory (scc No. 502), but includes the following: `1 shall 
bc very delighted to make for you a companion figure to St. 
George, and if you win give me a subject I will endeavour to 
give it form . . . as to the new figure, if it is to remain 
absolutely a unique production I must ask you £200 or fl50 
if you give mc the right to make one copy.' On 28 June 1910 
Gilbert wrote from Faulkner's Hotel, Vflhers Street, I.ondon, 
where he had been attending to some `troublesome business'. 
He was grateful to Brocklebank for his `exceedingly kind 
letters' and proposed to send off the `most beautiful cast of 
the St. George' next wcck on his return to Brugcs. It seems 
that another warrior saint designed for the tomb of the duke 
of Clarence had been proposed as a companion by 
Brocklebank-the Sf A4:¢.choc/ (cast for Windsor in 1899)- 
but, Gilbert protested, `1 cannot repeat "St Michael" for I 
have no model existent, but I should be only too delighted 
to make you a new figure of the same subject, and I should 
prefer it to be #„¢.g#c'. Gilbert had in fact made a repetition 
of the Sf A4¢.c¢fl}c/ in 1900 for William Vivian as a companion 
for the bronze S£ GGo7igG which Gilbert had sold in 1899 to 
Dunthornc (Dorment, op. cit., no. 73, p.165) but the model 
may well have been destroyed in the late summer of 1901 
when the sculptor went bankrupt and, he claimed, smashed 
his models to save them from the bailiffs. 
The succeeding letters must have maddened Brocklcbank. 
On 22 July Gilbert conceded that more than thrcc weeks had 
passed and hc had not sent the S£ Gco7i2i7e but he found that 
it still needed work, although the casting was good. On 28 
July hc found that he needed `an extra day or two to revise 
some of the detail'. On 19 Septcmbcr he announced that he 
was `not satisfied with the casting', had had to work much 
upon it-`Another cause of delay is, that I have altered the 
sword, and substituted for it an object of quite a new 
treatment. To wit, a sword in emblem rather than a weapon 
in fact.' On I December he is nearly ready to send the cast: 
`The delay has been no fault of mine. I have been waiting for 
two months past, the casting of the final dctal [thc cross].- 
It has arrived tonight. Tomorrow, I sham fit it in its place, and 
pack and send off to you the figure.' On 9 December he 
cxplaincd that mness had kept him from personal 
supcrintendancc of the packing but it will leave here `on 
Monday night'. Gilbert realzed that this was the moment 
for some flattery and pathos. 
I have substituted, for the oriSnal sword, a Processional Cross, 
which I like better myself, as being richer, and to my thinking, more 
suitable.-I must leave you to judge of this for yourself. I can only 
add, that what I have done has been prompted by a desire to do 
86 
my best, and I hope you will realizc that the onginal price I asked 
you, was not excessive, in view of the result, which I assure you, 
has cost me as much personal work, as a new creation would have 
done. I never send anything out of my work shop, that has not had 
my personal attention and care. It is perhaps for that reason that I 
live as I do, in solitude, and from hand to mouth. But let all that 
pass.~I was very grateful to you for coming to me at all, at a 
moment when I thought nobody cared for me more, and I have 
endeavoured to prove my sentiment, through the work I am sending 
you. 
On 14 Dcccmbcr Gilbert was able to write that 
`St. George' left here last night, and I consigned it myself to the 
Railway agents. I could not do so on Monday because I was obliged 
to keep my bed, owing to a slight attack of Bronchitis.-I was 
unable to prepay the carriage because I could get no through rate 
to Warminster. The cast went straight to you by `Grande Vitesse' 
thoroughly well packed and covered with every direction requisite 
. . . I did not insure, for I have always found such a proceeding 
useless . . . I have not 6tamped the bronze with my `tradc mark'! 
for I could not find a single spot on the whole work, where such a 
Superimposition, would not have interfered with the work.-I think 
the best plan would be for me to give you a signed label which you 
can affix under the plinth. I enclose such a document. 
The document in question survives. Unfortunately owing to 
rough handling by the customs the bronze was broken-presumably 
in the processional cross. On 19 December Gilbert 
expressed his determination to mend this in the spring. Hc 
received a banker's draft on New Year's Day 1911. On 29 
June 1911 he explained that his visit to England has been 
delayed but he would `ccrtainly' come in the autumn. On 5 
September hc wrote that hc had to renounce for the present 
his intended visit. Brocklcbank no doubt got someone else to 
fix the processional cross (No. 507) but not very securely for 
it has long been detached. I.ooking at it with the Sf GGo7gigG it 
seems incredible that they were ever attached: not only is the 
cross compositionally ungainly but it is a lost-wax cast which 
exposes the dry and mechanical sand-cast finish of the Sf 
George. 
Foundry of the Compagnie des Bronzes, Brussels 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
507. Crucifix surrounded by 
chembim 
13.5 cms. (height); 9.5 cms. (width) 
Bronze with a dark chestnut patina worn to a pale tan in the more 
salient parts. I.ost-wax cast, hollowed behind. There is no evidence 
of chiselling of any kind. 
For provenance see No. 506 to which this was attached. 
Gilbert claimed that this bronze was invented as a processional 
cross for S£ GGo#gG to carry, in lieu of the sword with a crucifix 
on the hilt which he had earlier employed. It may, however, 
have originated as an independent work, perhaps intended 
for execution in silver. It certainly resembles another 
ostentatiously waxy sketch involving the indistinct cherubim 
and angels whose wings enveloped the dead or dying Christ 
like petals; this is the bronze C47?.j7 J#4Po7?Gd ky ¢»g£/J, 
12cms.high,inaprivatecollectioninNewYork(RDorment, 
qurefiGi[`b:r:,`Sculpt!r_?ndGoldsmith(Ttoryalircdsny, 
I.ondon,1986), no. loo, p.185) which is closely related to 
a plaster cast published in the E¢Jfgy A# 14###¢/ ( 1903: 18) 
and may bc identical with a `headpiece of a dead Christ 
supported by Angels . . . nearly complete in mctal' which 
Henry Ganz saw in Gilbert's Bruges studio in September 
1907. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry of Compagnie des Bronzcs, Brussels 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
508, 509, and 510. Truth (or 
Hope), Piety (or Faith), and Charity 
37.5 cms. (height of Tr#£¢); 37 cms. (height of PG.Gay); 36 cms. 
(height of Chor¢.ty); 8.6 cms. (diameter of integral bronze base 
of r7'i#£4); 8.5 cms. (diameter of integral bronze base of P¢.rty); 
8.7 cms. (diameter of integral bronze base of C4¢rG.ty) 
Bronze with a slightly brown green patina. Each figure is a hollow 
sand-cast of one piece with a prominent fin of `flashing' in the 
interior about half-way up. The plinths are integral, each is 
approximately circular in plan but cut off at the back. Originally 
mounted on wooden plinths ( untraced). 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in 1927. Probably 
acqulrcd by him after 1913, since they are not mentioned in Gilbert's 
letters to Brocklebank between 1910 and 1913. Nos. 23-5 on 
Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927 as `A set of 3 female 
figures symbolising Faith, Hope and Charity 18" high on wood 
plinths'. 
Gilbert received a commission for a memorial to the Rt. Hon. 
I.ord Arthur Russell ( 1825-92) to be erected in the mortuary 
chapel of the Bedford family in St Michacl's, Chcnies, 
Buckinghamshire, in 1892. He completed the work in 1900. 
The memorial takes the form of an elaborate candlestick about 
9 feet high, with four allegorical figures T7"£b, P¢.rty, C¢¢r¢.ty, 
and Co#r¢gG set about half-way up, above complex organic 
ornament incorporating enamelled panels. Gilbert quarclled 
with Alessandro Parlanti, the finest founder in I.ondon in 
these years, in November 1899 after he had delivered the 
C4¢rify, together with a duplicate cast, and the Co#r¢gG (R 
Dorment, A//rcd G¢./4c77 (New Haven, Conn., and Ijondon, 
1985), 193-7). The fact that a duplicate was cast of Cb¢rity 
reveals that Gilbert did not think of the figures as exclusively 
appropriate to the setting in Chenies; but there was no 
thought of an edition of any of the figures (which in any case 
would not have been popular with the Bcdford finily) until 
the sole right to reproduce casts of three of the allegorical 
figures (the three here-Co#r¢gG has a distinct character, as 
Dormcnt points out, and may well have been origivally 
conceived for a different purpose) was granted to the 
Compagnie des Bronzes who sold them through the Fine 
Art Society in Bond Street. How many were cast at this stage 
is not known but the bronzes are not very common. One set 
is in the City Art Gallery and Museum, Birmingham (P36- 
38.'64). Another set was lot 83 at Phillips, Ijondon, on 14 
April 1987 (illustrated in colour in the catalogue). They 
retained their wooden bases upon which the figures were 
identified as Hopc, F¢;£4, and Char;ty although we know that 
different identities were intcndcd for the oriSnal memorial. 
Another cast of the C4#rG.ty was lot 58 at Sotheby's, I.ondon, 
on 26 November 1986 but was incised across the back of the 
integral bronze base `Cast from Plaster/Alfred Gilbert'. 
The C4¢7dy from the Ashmolean's set when lent in 1986 
to the Royal Academy exhibition A//red GS./de7?.. Sc"/pfor ¢„d 
Go/drow¢.£¢ could be compared with the duplicate of the 
88 
Chenics C¢¢77.ty formerly in the collection of Alfred Drury 
and now in the Victoria and Albert Museum (in store, A.2l-
1971 ) and the superiority of the latter version was very clear. 
Gilbert had thought of giving the figures ivory hands and 
faces (Dorment, op. cit.) but instead polychromc ambitions 
were transferred to the bronze itself, and in the origival and 
the duplicate the flesh was patinated red by Parlanti to contrast 
with the golden brown draperies. The granular surface as well 
as the colour of the Ashmolcan sand-cast is dull when 
compared with that of Parlanti's lost-wax cast. The 
Ashmolean's figure is far less finely modelled-there is much 
less detail in the right sleeve, the fingers of her right hand 
have now vanished, she has no left hand at all, and thcrc is 
no expression on the children's faces. Similar differences can 
bc discerned by comparing photographs of the other two 
allegories with the bronzes in place at Chenies. The 
explanation must bc that Gilbert cithcr had plaster casts of 
the sketch models or more probably had rough plasters of the 
completed bronzes which he rcworkcd (using a hard workable 
plaster) to make them more suitable for sand-casting and 
perhaps broader in feeling, endeavouring to correct his own 
fatal pursuit of the over-elaborate. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
89
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry of the Compagnie des Bronzcs, Brussels 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
511. St Catherine (The Miraculous 
Wedding) 
49.5 cms. (height, including integral bronze base) 
Bronze with a very dark brown patina worn in some salient areas to 
a chocolate brown. Hollow, sand-cast. The base was cast separately 
and the figure bolted to it. 
Bequeathed by the Rcvd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
Probably acquired by him after the summer of 1913 because not 
mentioned by Gilbert in his letters to Brocklcbank between 1910 
and 1913. No.15 in Andrew Shirley's rcccipt of January 1927 as 
`The Vlrgin and Child Standing 20" high'. 
Gilbert eventually included among the extraordinary saints in 
the grille of his tomb of the duke of Clarencc in the chapel 
at Windsor Castle two St Cathcrincs-Catherine of Sicna and 
Catherine of Egypt-and, although these were only 
completed after his return from `exile' in Bruges in 1926, hc 
must have been working on the thcmc at the time of his 
bankruptcy in 1901. Given the swirling forms of the broadly 
spreading base for this figure it must, as Lavinia Handley-
Read first pointed out, have been his project for a Sf C¢£ife7¢.#c 
in about 1898, which can also bc traced in a second modified 
version probably dating from a few years later ( `Alfred Gilbert: 
A New Assessment, Part 3: The Later Statuettes', 
Co»"o¢.JJc„r,164 ( 1968),148-51 ). Dorment has ingeniously 
proposed that 777c M¢.#¢c„/o#f Wcdd¢."g (as this group is 
often caued) is `a fusion of the imagery of both St Cathcrinc 
of Egypt, represented as a heavily veiled eastern woman, and 
St Catherine of Siena, who mystically wed the Christ Child' 
(Alf red Gilbert: Sculpeor and Goldsmith (R!ayal Aucedc:rrry , 
London, 1986), no. 98, pp.1834), but, whilst it is true that 
Gilbert was capable of treating Christian imagery as if it were 
a private mythology to be embellished and varied as hc fancied, 
this figure is surely intended simply as St Catherine of Egypt 
(or of Alexandria as she is more usually known), for she as 
well as Catherine of siena received from Christ a ring. The 
action depicted in the sculpture is that of Christ kissing the 
hand which he has just honoured in this manner. Had the 
model been executed for Windsor it would no doubt have 
been polychrome but Gilbert was prepared to have less 
extravagant casts made. The first was cast by `O'Neill' and 
sold to a Mrs Richardson in 1900 as we know from Gilbcrt's 
son's studio diary. This version is now in `a Parish Church in 
Scotland' (no. 98 in the exhibition cited). There are other 
casts in the City Art Gallery and Museum, Birminghain 
(P38.'73) and in the collection of Mrs Noel Blakiston in 
I.ondon (see Dorment's entry for no. 99, p.182, in VG.cforG.¢„ 
H¢d¢ Rc#¢!.ff#„ce, an exhibition held 1978-9 at the City Art 
Gallery, Manchester, at Minneapolis, and Brooklyn). As 
Dorment observed (ibid. ) it is surely to this work that Gilbert 
rcfcrs darkly in a letter to the press written in 1914 warning 
of pirated casts-`a first sketch for a small group, one of a 
number of subjects of its size, destined for the tomb of the 
90 
Duke of Clarencc, but abandoned for a better rendering 
upon which I am actually engaged at the present time'. It is 
typically inconsistent that Gilbert had himself sold a cast of 
the `abandoned' `skctch' in 1900. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry of the Compagnie des Bronzcs, Brussels 
After Sir Alfred GILBERT ( 1854-1934) 
512. St George conducted by 
Victory 
56 cms. (height including integral bronze base); 26 cms. (diameter 
of integral bronze base); 2.35 cms. (height of marble plinth); 
26.8 cms. (diameter of marble plinth) 
Bronze with a dark brown to golden brown patina. The patina is 
somewhat deteriorated; but it can be seen that the figure of victory 
was originally brighter in colour. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. The 
pennant, palm, and brittle trappings are separately fashioned in 
copper. The integral bronze base terminates in mouldings of 
octagonal plan and fits upon (but is not bolted to) an octagonal 
plinth of dark grey fossil marble (English or Belgian). The group 
received conservation treatment in 1984 from David Armitage for 
a corroding interior caused by damp storage and by solder employed 
for a fixing bar. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R. Brocklebank in November 1926. 
Acquired by him after-probably soon after-27 May 1913. No. 
27inAndrewShirley'sreceiptofJanuary1927as`Agroup,Boadicea 
on rockwork plinth 21 " high'. 
The idea for the group originated, according to Gilbert, in a 
dream of 15 May 1904. Gilbert thought that it might serve 
as an over-life-size Boer War memorial. He exhibited a plaster 
sketch model of the equestrian Sf Gco#gG at the Royal 
Academy in 1906 (no. 1773, `St George and the Dragon, 
Victory leading. Sketch model for a proposed War 
Memorial'). The figure of victory is derived from the figure 
origivally devised for the Quccn Victoria Memorial at 
Winchester which at this period Gilbert was having cast as an 
independent statuette (see No. 502). On 22 July 1910 Gilbert 
wrote to Brocklebank that he had `other versions of the same 
theme [ V¢.c4ory] and I am only too glad of the opportunity 
of providing new work instead of repeating old cfforts'. On 
28 July hc was more explicit: 
I should prefer to give you a new work. I have the model of a St 
George on horseback, being led by Victory. This work is very far 
advanced, indeed it is in plaster and was exhibited a few years ago 
at the Royal Academy. Personally I consider it by far my best 
dccorativc effort. I have as I told you in my last letter, stin another 
version of the same theme. I am, as you will see fond of the subject. 
The subject comes up again on 25 Apul 1913 when Gilbert 
wrote to Brocklcbank as fouows: 
As regards the St. George led by Victory the model is intact, as you 
saw it at the Royal Academy; the legs of the horse, ¢ffG #of m¢»f¢.»g. 
You see what fuse impressions photography badly done, sometimes 
give. The model is actually in London, stored with many other 
things belonging to me. I shall be pleased to give you the first refusal 
of the work and this I win do later, when I can detcrminc a price. 
Imayadd,thatmypricedoesnot[illegrbleword-render?]necessary 
a ready cash payment, I am sometimes, better plcascd to receive my 
payments by installments. 
The group is presumably one of three pieces (the others a Sf 
JIf¢.c4¢c/ and a C¢.rcG) mentioned as being prepared for 
Brocklebank in a letter of 27 May 1913. 
There is no subsequent surviving correspondence in the 
Department's archive, but it would seem likely that the 
Ashmolean's group is one of the earliest, if not the earliest, 
of the casts made of this group. Any bronze made under 
Gilbert's direction by that date was cast by the Compagnie 
dcs Bronzcs (he used the firm's stationery for many of his 
letters to Brocklebank) and they were making casts of the 
group a decade later for the Fine Art Society-the version in 
the Fitzwiuiam Museum, formerly in the Handley-Read 
Couection, can be dated to 1923. This latter version (which 
was no. 101 in the Royal Academy exhibition of 1986, 4//7cd 
Gjlper:: Sc_ulp.i?r .and Goldsmith) is .in saperto[ condiion, 
with the Gothic letters on the pennant for instance possible 
to decipher as `Alfred Gilber[' and distinguished in gold. The 
pennant is missing from an otherwise very fine cast in the Ijos 
Angcles County Museum of Art (M. 87.119.17). 
The problem that the letters to Brocklebank leave unclean 
is whcthcr Gilbert intended to make the group something 
less like a sketch. As it is, the base represents a weird and 
unresolved combination of the naturalistic symbolism found 
in the base of the Jc¢pr#f (No. 500) and the swirling symbolic 
ornament about which hc had since become so obsessed. 
Most viewers, however, fun to pcrccive the form of the dead 
dragon draped over the battlements of a toy city, so 
completely do both seem to decompose into the mud upon 
which the dainty knight (understandably mistaken for a 
woman by Andrew Shirley) prances. 
91
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Dora GORDINE FRBs (b. 1906) 
513. Posthumous portrait of 
Lucien Pissarro 
31.7cms. (height); 7.5 cms. (height of plinth); 24cms. (length 
of plinth); 20 cms. (width of plinth) 
:ars::zfo¥:hGaof:Sn¥;i:edne::,;:#cfs:,fjEatu;ncain¥::[oa:;:::tt.hwearb,ack 
of the crown of the head. Mounted on a wooden plinth. 
Presented by Orovida Pissarro, daughter of Lucien, in June 1957- 
registcrcd on 12 June. 
Lcttcrs in the Pissarro archive reveal that Dora Gordine Hare 
(she married in 1936 the Hon. Richard Hare, 1907-66, 
diplomat and linguist) was a friend of Orovida Pissarro. The 
sculptor acknowledged a chcquc for £50 towards the bronze 
of the latter's father on 5 June 1956 and in a letter which 
probably accompanied this she discussed the increase in cost 
which beard and hat would occasion over her oridnal estimate: 
noting that these doubled the size of the mere head and that 
one could hardly dispense with the beard and that one always 
had to pay for being distinctive rather than `mass-produced'. 
The hat was, it seems, omitted. A further payment of floo 
was acknowledged on 30 September 1956, as was, on 6 June 
1957, a `final cheque' of £815f. It would seem that Orovida 
commissioncd the sculpture specifically for the new Pissarro 
Room which was opened in the Ashmolcan Museum at the 
end of June, although in the event it was placed elsewhere 
and only the bust of Camille Pissarro by Paulin (No. 296) 
was set up in the room (which seems to have displeased Dora 
Gordinc). The projected hat might have been designed to 
make the portrait more of a companion with the Paulin. 
Letters from Ian Robertson to Orovida Pissarro of 15 and 24 
April discuss the patina of the bronze. According to 
Robertson, the Keeper, Parker, felt that the Paulin bronze 
was too black and had bccn impressed by a paler grecni§h 
patina that he had seen given to a torso by Rodin with the 
dealers Roland Browse and Delbanco and this Gordine was 
urged to imitate. A letter of 27 May suggests that the plinth 
was provided by the Museum. 
93
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Joseph GOTT ( 1786-1860) 
514. Cupid 
41.4cms. (height of bust); 11.8 cms. (height of turned socle and 
block plinth) 
Carrara marble. `l. GOTT Fl' is chiselled on the back edge of the 
temination of the bust. `S.34 e' is painted in black below the 
neck. Mounted on original turned and waisted socle with flat space 
•for inscription above upper mouldings. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. S. 34 in his catalogues. 
Probably acquired by him in Rome in 1851 (see No. 3), ccrtalnly 
acquired by him before 1857 when included in his preliminary 
manuscript catalogue (p. 7). The photographs of the Hill House, 
Stanmore, drawing room show the bust companion with No. 515 
on black marble piers on either side of a large looking glass opposite 
Nos. 3 and 20 similarly arranged at the other end of the room. 
The bust is copied from the celebrated A7#o7ic or Erof a/ 
Centocelle. also lmown a.s the Genius Of the Vatican, a statue-never 
restored in the arms and also missing most of the legs-which 
was to be seen in the Galleria delle Statue in the Vatican 
Museums. It had been discovered before 1772 under the 
papacy of Clement XIV, to whom it was sold for 280 fc#d¢. 
by Gavin Hanilton, having been excavated on the Via 
Labicana, Centocelle, on the site (Visconti speculated) of the 
Villa of Heliogabalus. (See E. Q. Visconti, A4"fco P¢.a-a/
c7"e"£¢.»o (Rome,1818), i, pl. xii, pp. 20-I; C. Pietrangeli, 
Scarii e scoperte di antichitd sotto il Pontificato di Pio VI 
(Rome,1958), 89 no. 4.) Copies were quickly in demand 
with visitors to Rome and they seem usually to have been 
busts. Henry Blundell, for instance, had two in his collection 
at Ince in Lancashire by 1803 (`H.B.', Acco#7¢£ a/£¢c Sf¢f"GJ 
. . . ¢f J»cc (Liverpool, 1803), mos. 121 and 183, probably 
corresponding with nos. 6901 and 6909 in the Walker Art 
Gallery, Liverpool, today, as noted by E. Morris and M. 
Hopkinson, FoyGGgiv C¢£¢/o2r%G (Liverpool,1977), 318-19). 
Fortnum seems to have had no personal knowledge of, or at 
least not much interest in, Gott, whose initial hc records in 
his later catalogues as `1.' misreading his own handwriting 
(`J' is given in his early entry). 
94 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Joseph GOTT ( 1786-1860) 
515. Isis 
54.5 cms. (height including socle); 12 cms. (height of socle); 
19.5 cms. (diameter of socle) 
Carrara marble. Chiselled on back edge of termination of the t5ust: 
`T. GOTT Fl' Mounted on an original turned and waisted socle with 
a flat space for inscription above the upper mouldings. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. S. 35 in his catalogues. 
Probably acquired by him in Rome in 1851 (see No. 3), certainly 
acquired by him before 1857 when included in his preliminary 
manuscript catalogue (p. 7). For location in the Hill House, 
Stanmoor, see No. 514, for which this is evidently designed as a 
companion. 
The head is copied from one in the Sala dei Busti of the 
Museo Pio-Clemcntino in the Vatican acquired from Cardinal 
Albani's collection under the pontificate of Pope Pius VI and 
published by Visconti as rcprescnting Isis on account of the 
I.otus-shaped central curls. It is now regarded simply as an 
ideal female. There are no obvious differences except that in 
the Vatican version the shoulders and chest are uncomfortably 
terminated along the lines of the falling locks of hair so that 
the head is more obviously a tidied-up fragment of a full-
1ength statue-the soclc, however, is the same. (For the 
Vatican marble see W.' Amelung, D¢.c Sc#/P£"7ic„ deJ 
V¢f¢.c¢7?¢.Jc¢c7¢ A4l#fc"7#f (Berlin,1908), ii, 3, no. 375, 
pp. 558ndo (text) and ii, pis. 65 and 73.)
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Giovanni Battista GUELFI (active 1715-34) 
516 and 517. Bust portraits of 
Thomas Fermor and his wife 
Henrietta Louisa, earl and countess 
of Pomfret 
71.5 cms. (height of bust of I.ord Pomfret including socle); 
74.7 cms. (height of bust of IAdy Pomfret including socle); 
13.4 cms. (height of both socles); 19.8 cms. (diameter of base of 
both socles); 121 cms. (height of both pedestals) 
Carrara marble. There is a slight flaw in the marble under the chin 
of the portrait of Lady Pomfret. Both busts are attached to turned, 
waisted socles of a green and pink bruised and mottled breccia 
marble. There is a metal plate attached under the base of the socle 
of the bust of I.ady Pomfret. Both busts are mounted on pedestals 
in the form of column shafts of ¢rccc;¢ dG. SGr"pezz# marble with 
plinth and base moulding of white Carrara marble. The names of 
the sitters and their dates are chiselled on the columns and the 
letters are added. 
Presumed to have been given to the University of Oxford with the 
residue of the earl of AIundcl's conection of marbles at Easton 
Neston by the dowager countess of pomfret in 1755, but conceivably 
added to that gift after her death. Recorded by C. F. Ben in the 
first of his j4"„#¢/ RcPo#f to the visitors of the Ashmolean Museum 
as Keeper of the newly formed Department of Fine Art (1908: 9) 
as recently supplied with their pedestals and inscriptions and placed 
in two of the niches on the landing of the redecorated great staircase, 
where they have remained ever since. 
E= 
r 
96 
The suggestion that this pair of busts is by Guclfi seems first 
to have been made by Mrs Esdaile (in a letter to C. F. Bell of 
1922 or 1923 which has not survived but to which Mrs Esdaile 
refers in a later letter to Parker of 15 November 1934). She 
pointed out that Guclfi was known to have worked for the 
Pomfrets at Easton Neston. The similarity with other 
documented and signed sculpture by Guelfi, and in particular 
with other bust portraits, confirms the attribution beyond 
reasonable doubt. Comparison with the marble bust inscribed 
`Joannes Baptista Guelfi Romanus fccit' commemorating the 
duchess of Richmond, who died in 1722, part of the 
monument crectcd in 1734 in the church at Decne, 
Northamptonshire, for which the terracotta model is in the 
Victoria and Albcrt Museum, is particularly telling. 
If the latter terracotta is excepted, the busts of the Pomfrets 
must be the best surviving works by Guelfi in this country. 
They are also in excellent condition. The flow and the texture 
of the antique drapery, the crisp carving of the hair (most 
evident in Lady Pomfret's side curls), and the softness of the 
flesh (in Lord Pomfret's lips especially) are marvellously 
preserved. However, the fact that husband and wife look 
sufficiently alike to bc brother and sister hints at Guelfi's 
limitation as a portraitist-a limitation weu defined by 
Margaret Whinney: `All Guelfi's portraits have the sane long 
faces, large-featured, haughty, and shghtly horse-like-in fact, 
to an Italian, the typical English face' (Sc#/Pf"rG G.# Br¢.}¢G.7¢ 
1530-J830 (Harmondsworth,1964), 81 ). 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps by Giovanni Battista GUELFI (active 1715-34| 
518. Female sphinx `couchant' 
61 cms. (height including integral plinth); Ill cms. (length of 
integral plinth); 33 cms. (width of integral plinth) 
Coarse-grained white marble (not Carrara). The surface is much 
abraded from exposure to the frost. The nose, pa.rt of the lips, and 
the top of the miniature Double Crown have been broken off (before 
1763). The sculpture was cleaned by Mrs Kimber in 1989. It was 
previously darkened with much deeply ingrained dirt and partially 
green from moss. 
The sphinx is one of a pair belonging to the collection of ancient 
sculptures given to Oxford University by the dowager countess of 
Pomfrct (see No. 526) in 1755. The collection included a large part 
of the `Arundel marbles' bought by her father-in-law Sir William 
Fermor (later Ijord Lempster) from the sixth duke of Norfolk in 
1691; until its transfer to Oxford it was housed at the Pomfrets' 
seat Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, where the sculptures were 
distributed between the house and grounds. The two `Sphynges' 
were seen in the garden-house there by John I.oveday (J. E. T. 
I.oveday, D¢.¢vy a/a To#y j» j732 (Roxburghc Club, Edinburgh, 
1890), 225). Both may have originally been in the great collection 
formed by the earl of Arundel in the first half of the seventeenth 
century: there are, however, grounds for thinking that only one 
came from that source, and that the other was made at the behest 
of the Pomfret family (scc below). In Oxford the sphinxes were 
placed in the sculpture gallery of the Old Schools to either side of 
the statue of "¢.»crp¢ which closed the vista as may just be discerned 
in William Westall's watercolour drawing of 1813. After transfer to 
the University Galleries they were placed in the Crypt or sub-gallery 
but remained visible to the public. They are recorded there in the 
H¢#dfoo4 G„¢.dG of 1859 (mos. 114 and 116, p. 23). They seem to 
have been put into storage in the late nineteenth century. They 
were loaned to the Botanic Gardens whose curators had requested 
suitable statuary in 1959. In May 1989 they were rctrievcd on the 
initiative of Dr Whitchouse and placed on display in the Randolph 
Gallery. 
Although the two Pomfret sphinxes are closely matched in 
iconography, there are notable differences of style: the sphinx 
catalogued here seems to have been modelled on the other 
statue, which is smaller and less well preserved. Neither is an 
accomplished piece of sculpture, and the smaller sphinx has 
been executed in a particularly summary fashion. Nonetheless, 
its adherence to traditional Egyptian iconography is 
noteworthy, and suggests that it is of the Roman Imperial 
period, when other sinular sphinxes were certainly made for 
`Egyptian' settings. The white marble is atypical of native 
Egyptian work, even of this period, and probably indicates a 
Mediterranean origiv. This sphinx might well have been 
acquired in Italy in the seventeenth century for Anindel's 
collection. 
Its larger companion (No. 518) is a more corpulent and 
fleshy creation in which the details of the smaller sphinx are 
copied but improved upon: the anatomy is rendered more 
plastically, the face broadened and ennobled, the roughly 
incised details of the collar translated into relief, and the 
striped »cowef headcloth treated in a style closer to the 
cushiony aspect of this fcaturc on rococo sphinxes. The 
rounded profile of the chest has been converted, erroneously, 
into swelling female breasts. The sphinx might have been 
made for Arundel, but for reasons of style and circumstance 
it seems likely that it was commissioned as an addition to the 
collection at Easton Neston, at a time when paired sphinxes 
(often differentiated as male and female) were becoming 
popular items of garden sculpture. 
Guelfi was said by Vertuc to have spent `somc time at Iid. 
Pomfrets . . . Eston . . . Northampt. imployd. repairing the 
Antique Statues. Arundel Collect.' (`The Vcrtuc Notebooks', 
iri, Wfl7/po/c Soc¢.cty, 22 ( 19334), 734) so it is likely that it 
was he who created this larger sphinx to pair with the smaller, 
ancient one (as suggested by John Davis in his forthcoming 
study of garden ornaments). `Afterwards Guclfi was much 
employed for many years by Iud. Burlington in his house in 
I.ondon and made many statues for his Villa at Chiswick' 
(ibid. ). There are at Chiswick a pair of portland stone sphinxes 
dating from before 1733 (now in the gardens north of the 
house) which show strong similarities to the Pomfrct pair 
with their miniature Double Crowns. They arc, however, 
much more accomplished sculptures and have the addition 
of omamcntal saddle-cloths masking their ribby flanks, a 
dcvicc probably popularized by Houzeau and Lerambert's 
Versailles pair of 1668 (seemingly the progenitors of the 
fashion for garden sphinxes, though the putti which 
accompany them do not appear elsewhere). The Chiswick 
stone sphinxes scrvcd in turn as the models for a lead sphinx 
by John Cheere (at Chiswick, with copies elsewhere) and a 
pair of stone sphinxes at Goodwood. 
The sift of the Pomfret Collection to the University was 
marked in the O#o#¢ A/ow¢"¢c& for 1755 with a fanciful 
engraving of its triumphant arrival, but the single sphinx 
depicted therein resembles neither sculpture closely but is 
rather a generic representation, typical of antiquarian 
iuustrations of the period. The larger sphinx was illustrated 
in an engraving by J. Miller in Chandier's A4l¢rowo7¢ O#o»¢.c»j¢ 
of 1763 in a garden setting and in its prcscnt broken condition 
(i, pl. CIXVII). In Chandler's notes there is no indication 
that it was not an ancient work like its companion: `eximie 
sculpta, ct cum altera, quam habemus, huic simili, more 
Aegyptio omatissima' (ibid. p. viii). 
Most of this catalogue entry has been compiled by Helen 
Whitehouse of the Department of Antiquities. 
97
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
98 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
H. HELY (active 1822) 
519. Dying gladiator 
49+7 cms. (height including plinth); 6.9 cms. (height of plinth); 
94.8 cms. (length of plinth); 44.6 cms. (width of plinth) 
Carrara marble. The sculpture was discoloured a uniform dark brown 
presumably from storage in condition where dirt was combined 
with the discharge of oil heating-t a glance it would have been 
mistaken for a bronze. When cleaned early in 1987 it was found 
that the marble had been stained an unattractivc yeuow and all the 
original polish had been lost. The end of the penis has been broken 
off and lost, as has the large toe of the proper right foot. There are 
recent minor losses to the lower edge of the plinth. A small 
projection in the pubcs reflects the use of a copyist's point. `H. HELy. 
FACIEBAT / ROMAE. MDCCCXXII.' is chiselled on the front face of 
the plinth to proper left near the figure's left foot. The date is in 
smaller capitals. 
From the bequest of the Revd Robert Finch MA, received in the 
Department soon after 22 February 1973 when the Librarian of the 
Taylor Institute, Giles Barber, wrote to Gerald Taylor seeking 
suitable storage for this item (and a plaster cast of an antique relief). 
The sculpture was no. 45 on a list of 45 works of art described as 
part of the bequest in a memorandum dated `4/6/83' (1883) to 
which the note is added that the above works were `finally' handed 
to the Keeper of the Ashmolean on 22 August 1921 but returned 
by him as not desirable. The history of this bequest is highly 
complicated. Finch ( 1783-1830) died in Rome, having resided for 
some years in Italy for reasons of health. He bequeathed his library 
and works of art to Oxford University, with a life interest for Henry 
Mayer, his secretary, who, however, handed them over to the 
University in 1839. The collections were deposited in the Taylorian 
but were redistributed and partly disposed of around 1910. C. F. 
Bell, then Keeper of the Department of Fine Art, did his utmost 
not to accept anything and had a specially low opinion of this marble. 
Although no documentation exists to prove it, however, it must be 
identical with the copy of the G/¢d¢.¢}or displayed in the University 
Galleries during the nineteenth century at the head of the stairs 
leading down from the Randolph Gallery to the basement. 
The J2)l¢."gg/¢dG.¢£o7', or P);¢.„g G¢#/, in the Capitolinc 
Museum, of which this is a poor, reduced copy, was for 
several centuries one of the most famous and frequently copied 
antique statues. For an account of its fame and critical fortunes 
see F. Haskell and N. Penny, T¢ae ¢#d £4e A78f¢.g"c (I.ondon 
and New Haven, Conn.,1981), 224-7. I have found no 
other mention of the sculptor Hely. 
99
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Presumably `Cox of Chapel Place', I.ondon 
After John HENNING ( 1771-1851 ) 
520. Gods in congress, warriors on 
parade, and sacrificial procession 
(from the Parthenon frieze) 
Each relief is 5.2 cms. high. They are of varied length. The frame 
is 32 cms. high and 43 cms. long 
Twenty-one thin copper electrodeposits, slightly tarnished, nailed 
irregularly into wood, and framed with a plain, flat, coarse pine 
moulding painted white. The five reliefs in the first row include 
inscriptions in raised letters as follows: `W5 HENNING F 1819'; 
`W9 / HENNING F 1819'; `W4 HENNING F. PUB. 1817'; `Wl 1'; 
`Wlo / HENNING F / 1819 / 19 QUEENS ROW. PENTONVILLE 
LONDON'. Of the four reliefs in the second row the first is unlettered, 
the others are inscribed as follows: `HENNING. F. 1820'; `W5 
HENNING F 1819'; `HENNING F. APRIL 1820 / I.ondon'. The four 
reliefs in the third row arc inscribed as follows: `HENNING. F. / S / D'; 
`HENNING F.1817 / ILW'; `8W/ 1819 LONDON / HENNING. F'; 
`. . ORTH HENNING F LONDON 1820'. The four reliefs in the fourth 
row are stamped as follows: `D'; `E9 8 / HENNING. F'; `WI W2 
HENNING. F. May 2.1821'; `HENNING. F. PUB [thc remainder is 
illedble]' . The second of the four reliefs in the fifth row is unstamped, 
the others are stamped as follows: `HENNING / SID'; `E.11 HENNING 
F'; `HENNING 1817/ 14 W'. An old label on the back of the franc 
is inscribed in brown ink in a nineteenth-century hand: `ELectro 
type by Henning Copied from Bas reliefs (reduced) found in the 
ruins of the Temple of Apollo / Epicurus Built on Mount Cotylion 
at a distance from the ancient city / of Phigalia in Arcadia-this Bas 
relief is part of the Frieze in the interior / of the Cella / Presented by 
Mr Rind / 1854.' 
Given to the University in 1854 by `Mr Rand' (see above); 
transferred from the Department of Antiquities in 1962. If Mr 
Rand's Sft was to the University Galleries it was not recorded in 
the Donations Book. It may have been given to some omer 
institution within the University and subsequently deposited. 
The label on this franc of rclicfs is erroneous: all the retiefs 
are after the Parthenon ffieze in the British Museum and have 
bccn thoughtlessly assembled. The two duplicates make it 
unlikely that the frame rcprcscnts an oridnal set. The five 
reliefs in the first row are from the west frieze of the temple: 
slab V; slab IX; slab VII; slab IX; slab IX. The four reliefs in 
the second row are mostly from the north frieze: slab XIII; 
slab XVIII; slab V (from the west frieze, a duplicate of the 
first relief on the top row); slab XIV. The four reliefs in the 
third row are: south frieze, part of slab XXXVIII and slabs 
XLIII-XLIV; west frieze, slab XIV; west frieze, slab VIII; 
noith frieze, slabs XXII-XXIII. The four reliefs in the fourth 
row are: south frieze, slab XXXVIII; east ffieze, parts of slabs 
VI and VII; west frieze, slabs I-Ill; west friczc, slab Ill. The 
four reliefs on the fifth row are a duplicate of the first on the 
third row; east ffiezc, part of slab V; east frieze, part of slab 
VII; west ffieze, slab XIV. 
John Henning, the son of a carpenter and cabinet maker 
in Paisley, Scotland, was working as a wax modeller in 1799. 
He moved to Glasgow in 1801, to Edinburgh in 1803, to 
100 
I.ondon in 1811, experimenting with paste and enamcls in 
emulation of his compatriot James Tassie. In London 
Hcnning started drawing from the Parthenon marbles and in 
1812, encouraged by Princess Charlotte, hc carved a miniature 
version of the friczc in ivory, restoring the fragmentary or 
abraded portions. He then made slate intaglios from which 
casts in white enamel and plaster could be made and by 1816 
proposed making casts in one of wcdgwood's wares (hc had 
earlier made contact with Wedgwood concerning the 
reproduction of his medallion portraits). The proprietors of 
the ivories, Earl Rosslyn, the marquess of Lansdowne, and 
Princess Charlotte, permitted this. Indeed the princess, who 
had herself portrayed by Hcnning in the attitude of one of 
the goddesses on the frieze, is said to have `luxuriated' in the 
idea of casts of the ivory frieze being `distributed among her 
fficnds'. The enamel and plaster reproductions, however, were 
undertaken on a highly commercial basis. 
A complete set was offered for 30 guineas. `It has been 
done to a scale of a twentieth of the originals; being two 
inches high, and twenty-four feet four inches long; published 
in six parts, from forty-six to fifty-four inches long, each part 
framed at length separately; they form elegant ornaments for 
a chimney-piece; or, fitted up in emulation of volumes, arc 
adapted to the library. Any part, or portions of a part, can be 
had separatcly', according to an advertisement of 18 
December 1820. Between 1820 and 1825 Henning also 
published casts of miniature reliefs he had made of the 
Phigalian frieze (see No. 521 ) and the Raphael cartoons. On 
10 August 1841 an advertisement announced that the price 
had bccn greatly reduced owing to piracy. The whole series 
in a mahogany cabinet with nine drawers was offered at 10 
guineas. On 27 November 1845 the publication by 
subscription of Frecbairn's contour engravings after 
Henning's reliefs was announced and the same advertiscmcnt 
mentions the genuine electrotypes made from the intaglios 
by `Mr Cox of Chapel Place Battersea Fields'. Despite these 
ventures and the commissions for stone carving shared with 
his son, John Henning the younger, for the exterior of the 
Hyde Park Screen, the Athenaeum in Ijondon, and the Royal 
Manchester Institution, Henning died in poverty. (Almost all 
the above information is drawn from J. Malden, /o4" 
Henning 1771-1851: t. . . a very ingenious Modeller' (FLerr£Iow 
District Council and Art Galleries, Paisley,1977). ) For the 
process of electrotyping (org#/p¢#ap/¢f£¢.A) in the last century 
see S. Bury, Vjcfor¢.¢» E/Gcfyop/¢£g (I.ondon,1971 ), 8. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
101
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
After John HENNING ( 1771-1851 ) 
521. Lapithae battling with 
Amazons and centaurs (from the 
Temple of Apollo at Bassae) 
Each piccc is 6.2 cms. high. The lengths of the pieces are as 
follows: (¢) 21.5 cms., (4) 23.9 cms., (c) 22.5 cms., (® 24.5 cms., 
(G) 23.6cms., (/) 22.75 cms., ®) 24.5 cms., (47) 18 cms., 
( ®.) 24.5 cms. 
Plaster of Paris with ingrained dirt and slight speckling from mould 
in a few areas. (a)-(/) and ®)-( S.) were framed under glass with a 
plain ebonizcd pine moulding as two continuous stripsrutn 
arrangement dating (to judge from old newspapers used as backing) 
from the last century. There are many breaks and missing chips as 
follows: (a) broken vertically in one place; chips missing from the 
projecting base; ( 4) chip missing from the projecting base; ( c) broken 
verdcally in one place; chips missing from the projecting base; ( dy 
broken vertically in one place; chips missing from the cdgc to proper 
right, the projecting edge, and along the break; (c) broken vertically 
in two places, of which that to proper right retains some old adhesive; 
chips missing from the projecting base, from the lower comer to 
proper right, and fi.om the proper left edge; (/) broken vertically in 
one place with remains of old adhesive; (g) broken vertically in two 
places; chips missing from the projecting edge and the shields; (A) 
broken vertically in one place and along two other lines to form 
two large and two small triangular pieces; chips missing from the 
two sides, the projecting edge, and along the breaks; ( ;) broken 
vertically in two places with other breaks au to the proper left-forming 
two large and four small pieces (and one piece missing); 
chips missing from proper right edge and from the breaks. In 
addition there is abrasion on some of the salient portions of the 
relief. 
102 
On permanent loan from Trinity College, Oxford. The transfer of 
these reliefs was arranged by the College archivist, Bryan Ward-
Perkins, in the summer of 1987. The reliefs were presumably given 
to Trinity College in the nineteenth century. 
The nine plaster casts are taken from John Hcnning's 
miniature reproduction ( and restoration) of the ancient Greek 
ffieze of the Temple of Bassae (acquired for the British 
Museum in 1814). Hcnning's own casts are stamped with 
his name and with dates ( 1822 and 1823). It is possible that 
some casts, perhaps the earliest, before imitations appeared, 
were not stamped. The Ashmolean's casts, which are not 
stamped, may belong to this category: certainly their quality 
would be surprising in a pirated edition. For Henning's 
reproductions of antique fficzes generally scc No. 520. These 
rclicfs correspond as follows to the numbcrcd casts illustrated 
in I . Ma+den, John Henning 1771-1851.. t. . . a TJery ingeniotts 
A4lode//Gr' ( Renfrew District Council and Art Galleries, Paisley, 
1977), unpagivated: (¢) with number 8 (and (¢) is also 
scratched with an 8); (4) with numbers 9 and 10; (c) with the 
unnumbered first section; (d) with numbers 13 and 14, but 
more complete; (c) with the third piece down; (/) with 
numbers 11 and 12; ®) with part of number 18 and with 
number 19; (A) with number 18; (¢.) with number 20. The 
order in which the reliefs have bccn catalogucd here 
corresponds with that in which they wcrc framed in the last 
century. It is clear that it is most unlikely to reflect an 
arrangement made by Henning or by anyone familiar with 
the display in the British Museum. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
103
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
After designs by Thomas HOPE ( 1769-1831 ) 
522 and 523. Pair of hall tables 
( only one illustrated) 
79.5 cms. (height); 62.4 cms. (width of supports); 2.6 cms. 
(height of slabs); 133.6 cms. (length of slabs); 64.8 cms. (width 
of slabs) 
Mahogany. The `marble' slab is of green porphyry. The cross rail is 
a later addition. Some of the relief ornament on the scroll-shaped 
supports is applied*.g. the palmctte above and the honeysuckle 
below, also the innermost relief lines-and pieces of this have been 
replaced. The tables are placed upon modern marquetry plinths. 
Bought at The Deepdene Sale, Christie's, July-August 1917, lot 
827, for £50. The tables were designed by Thomas Hope before 
1807, probably first employed in Duchess Street, IJ)ndon, and 
subsequently moved to The Deepdene near Dorking (acquired by 
Hope in May 1807 and extensively redecorated over the fouowing 
fifteen years). 
ThorrL2Ls Hope:' s Household Fttrmitt4re and 17iterior 
DGco7t¢f¢.a", published on I May 1807, recorded the furniture 
which he had had made for his house in Duchess Street-a 
house which was also a museum and in which he hoped that 
the `entire assemblagc' of the `productions of ancient art and 
of modern handicraft' would b€ harmonious (ibid. 34). The 
furniture was therefore modelled on antique Egyptian, Greek, 
and Roman examples. In this case the mahogany is treated 
much as the Romans treated a dark marble such as roj:fo ¢„f¢.co. 
And indeed the chief source for the design ofthc scrou supports 
with lion's paw feet must be the ancient bath made of this 
material known as the tomb of Marcus Agrippa, long visible 
in the portico of the I'anthcon, but incorporated in the 1730s 
into the tomb of Pope Clement XII in the Corsini Chapel in 
the Basilica of SS Giovanni e Paolo. This had already inspired 
not only numerous sarcophagi but the severe modern benches 
dc§igncd by Robert Adam for the mausoleum at Bowood in 
the early 1760s. Another source may have been the rt)JJo 
¢"£2.co bath chair in S. Giovanni in Laterano, Rome 
(presumably the `red marble throne in the Vatican' to which 
DaiNid`Nairkin rofcrs in Thomas Hope and the Nco-classical 
Jde¢ (I.ondon, 1968), 200). It would sccm unlikely, however, 
that these antique sources were the only inspiration for Hopc's 
design. Such scroll-shaped supports were also popular for 
Florentine tables of the mid-sixteenth century (a fine example 
was in the Bardini Collection and another is in the Leipzig 
Museum, both illustrated in F. Schottmuller, I owob¢./¢. G 
l'abitaeione del Rina§cimento in Italia (S"ttgart, L928), 
pis. 300 and 308, pp.133 and 137). Furthcrmorc earlier neo-classical 
dcsigncrs had revived this type of table. C. Percier 
and P. L. Fontainc's Rcc#c¢./ def de'cor¢fG.o„j (Paris, 1801 ) 
includes a very similar table in the perspective of the bedroom 
of Citizen V. 
The green Egyptian poaphyry of which the slabs are 
composed is a rare antique material, with a sombre beauty 
appropriate to Hopc's scvcrc taste, which he must have 
acquired from Rome where they had no doubt been cut from 
104 
the ccntrc of a column shaft (for an account of this stone see 
R Gnoli, A4:¢7'7¢¢o7i¢ Ro7"¢„¢ (Rome,1971 ),108-9). 
If the line engravings in Ho#£efo/d F#r"¢.f#yc which 
published these tables are reliable (pl. 12, nos. 6 and 7) then 
the tables origivally stood on plinths higher than those with 
which they are at present provided, and there was no stretcher 
between the supporting members: indeed the space below the 
table was occupied by one of the larger Greek vases in Hope's 
collection. The oriSnal absence of a stretcher may rcflcct the 
designer's lack of practical experience, neglecting to take the 
weight of the slab into account. In his preface Hope mentions 
that in the `vast metropolis' of I.ondon so `teeming with 
artificcrs' he had met with hardly any craftsmen capable of 
executing his ideas rchably: he cites a French bronzist, Decaix, 
and a carver from the Ijow Countries, Bogaert, however, and 
conceivably the table was made in the latter's workshop. 
C. F. Bell bought the tables for use in the galleries and they 
were fitted, probably under his Kcepership, with brass-framed 
glass cases made by the firm of Frederick Sage and Company 
in which a sclcction of the Fortnum bronzes were long 
displayed. These cases were removed in 1986. Bell mentioned 
in the A""„¢/ RGPo77 ( 1917: 6J9) that the tables would 
provide `hints' for the making of appropriate new fumiturc 
for the galleries. They must indccd have inspired the oak 
cases with scroll legs now employed for displaying drawings 
in the Combe Gallery (acquired in 1988 from the Taylor 
Library, to whom they had been transferred from the Bodleian 
Library who had obtained them from the Department of 
Antiquities to which they had migrated from the Department 
of Fine Art for which they were origivally made under Bell's 
directions). 
In addition to the two tables, Bell acquired from The 
Decpdcne sale (as lot 919) four sabre leg chairs with lyre-shaped 
splats, in `bois clair' with honeysuckle and other 
stylized inlay, also made to Hope's designs (Appendix 2, nos. 
68-71 ). In 1953 Lady Henriques bequeathed to the Museum 
a large group of furniture which included a massive sideboard, 
298 cms. long, of solid mahogany with four ormolu wreaths 
on a frieze above four cabriole legs with hon's paws, reedcd 
anklets, and honeysuckle ornaments on the `knees' which was 
one of a pair made for Gloucester House, Park I.arc, the 
Ijondon home of the duke of Cambridge (the pair, belongivg 
to the testator's sister, was destroyed in the Blitz). This, 
although not designed by Hope, is close in style to the 
furniture of Duchess Strcct (Appendix 2, no. 73). 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably foundry of samuel Packer,12 Argyll Place, Ijondon 
After Samuel JOSEPH ( 1791-1850) 
524. High-relief bust portrait of sir 
Walter Scott 
21.4 cms. (height of bust); 25.5 cms. (diameter of backplate) 
Bronze with a very dark slightly olive patina. The bust is hollow cast 
and soldered to the backplate. `SIRWALTER SCoTT' is chiselled in 
capital letters beneath the bust on the plate ground. On the reverse 
of the plate is engraved in very florid letters `S. Joseph RS.A. 
Sculpsit. / 1822 / Publishq 1830.' 
The bronze is kept in the Hebcrden Coin Room as part of the 
collection purchased from Colonel Michael H. Grant in 1953. It is 
included in his manuscript catalogue on p.156. 
Joseph was a foundation member of the Royal Scottish 
Academy: hence the RSA. The bust of Scott dates from the 
year of his move to Edinburgh in 1822. A bust by him of 
Scott (character and medium unrecorded) is said to be at 
Preston Hall, near Edinburgh, and to be dated 1825 (R. 
Gunnis, Dictionary Of British Sculptors (-Icondon, +968) 222). 
By 1830 Joseph had returned to Ijondon. The attribution of 
the cast to Parker's foundry depends upon its similarity to 
No. 525 which may well have been intended as a companion 
(Mackenzie and Scott being the most eminent Scottish 
authors of the day). 
106 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry of samuel Parker,12 Argyll Place, London 
After Samuel JOSEPH (1791-1850) 
525. High-relief bust portrait of 
Henry Mackenzie 
20.5 cms. (height of bust); 25.5 cms. (diameter of backplatc) 
Bronze with a very dark slightly olive patina. The bust is hollow cast 
and soldered to the backplatc. There are small firing cracks in the 
lower part of the neck and minor scratches to the back plate. `HENRy 
MACKENZIE' is chise[led in capital letters beneath the bust on the 
plate ground. On the reverse of the plate are engraved in neat capital 
letters: `SAML JOSEPH SCULPSIT / S. PARKER FECIT XIT ARGYLL 
PIACE / PUBLISHD / AS THE ACT DIRECTS / LONDON FEBY 
VI. / MDCCCXXX' . 
The bronze is kept in the Heberden Coin Room as part of the 
collection of medals purchased from Colonel Michael H. Grant in 
1953. It is included in his catalogue on p.153. 
There is a bust of the Scottish novelist and man of letters 
Henry Mackenzic ( 1745-1831 ) by Joseph at the Scottish 
National Portrait Gallery which is dated 1822 (R. Gunnis, 
Dictionary Of British Sculptors (London, ±968), 222) .I+ is 
similar to this but undrapcd and differently cut at the 
shoulders. By 1825 a bust of Mackenzie by Joseph belonged 
to Sir Walter Scott at Abbotsford (C. Wainwright, 777c 
Ro7„¢#£¢.c J»£Gr¢.or (London and New Haven, Conn.,1989), 
190). 1822 is also the year in which Joseph exhibited a `model 
for a bust to be worked in marble' of Mackenzie at the Royal 
Academy (no.1044). The portrait of scott reproduced in a 
simhar bronze cast which is also dated 1830 (No. 524) 
perhaps also originated in a model of 1822. Little is known 
of the bronze founder Packer. He was paid in 1822 for a 
sumptuous chimney-piece in the Royal Pavilion, now at 
Buckingham Palace, involving ormolu enrichments and 
Chinese figures of painted metal (Gunnis, op. cit. 291 ). His 
smau bronze herm busts of I.ord Brougham and William IV 
both published in 1831 are in the National Portrait Gallcry-another 
version of the latter was lot I, Christie's, London, 5 
May 1988.
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Samuel JOSEPH ( 1791-1850) 
526. Sir David Wilkie 
68 cms. (height, including plinth) 
Plaster of Paris, coated with shellac and grey paint. Hollow cast. 
The paint has flaked in some areas, most notably on the proper 
right foot and the front of the plinth. A part of the palette has been 
broken off and refixed but small chips are missing. There is another 
break diagonally across the plinth from beside the proper right foot 
to the centre of the back. 
Presented in 1952 by Sir Malcolm Darling of 42 Catherine Place, 
Ijondon Swl. Registered on 16 April. It was probably inherited 
from the donor's grandfather Dr George Darling (d.1862), who 
counted Wilkie and other artists (among them Haydon, I.awrence, 
and Chantrey) among his ffiends and patients. 
Joseph exhibited a posthumous marble bust of wilkic, a fellow 
Scot, at the Royal Academy exhibition of 1843 (no.1515). 
This is now in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery 
(no.1220). In the following year the colossal bronze statue 
of wilkic by him was presented by subscribers to the National 
Gallery-this was transferred to the Tate Gallery (no.1764) 
where it is in store. The commission for this bronze is 
dcscribcd in an appendix to Alan Cunningham's I,¢re a/S¢.7' 
D¢p¢.¢ WG./fe;c (I.ondon,1843), iii. 516-23. He quotes from 
the 44lo7w¢.#g C¢ro"¢.c/;s account of the meeting on 28 August 
1841 at the Thatched House Tavern at which a committee 
was fomed to erect a monument. Cunningham was 
appointed secretary. A footnote on p. 523 informs us that `at 
a subsequent meeting Mr S. Joseph, not without opposition, 
was selcctcd to execute the statue, the trustees of the National 
Gallery having consented to its erection in their entrance 
hall'. The plaster probably records the prclininary clay model 
made for the committee's approval. 
REiH±HI 
108 
Eric RENNINGTON RA ( i888-1960) 
527. Head from the portrait of 
Thomas Hardy 
31 cms. (height) 
Bronze with a chestnut patina rubbed to a yellow brown in the 
eyebrows and on the bridge of the nose. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. 
Given by the artist at an unrecorded date. 
The portrait is cut off uncompromisingly at the shirt collar to 
emphasize that it is a fragment of a full-length statue. It must 
indeed bc cast from the same model as the statue of Hardy 
unveiled on Sunday 2 September 1931 at Top o' Town, 
Dorchestcr, by Sir James Barrie, a work erected by public 
subscription ( supported by the mayor of Dorchester, 
Alderman Wilfrid F. Hodges, with a committee chaircd by 
the countess of Ilchestcr). Kennington was at this date at the 
height of his fame, having excited attention with his war 
memorial erected in Battersea Park in 1924, and obtained 
the commission for allegorical scenes on the fa€ade of the 
Royal Shakespeare Theatre at Stratford-upon-Avon, a work 
upon which he was engaged between 1928 and 1932. 
Kennington had placed a plaster cast of his recumbent effigy 
of Lawrence of Arabia for St Martin's, Wareham, on 
temporary loan in the Museum during the winter of 1939 
(A„""a/ Rcpo77, 36). Ion Robcrtson applied in vain to the 
National Art-Collections Fund in October 1963 for funds to 
purchase, from the Leicester Gallery, a bronze cast (one of 
an edition of 12) of a maquette for the same effigy. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
A. KENRICK (dates unknown) 
528. Profile medallion head of 
Queen Victoria 
24.5 cms. (height); 38.5 cms. (diameter of backplate) 
The head is of iron with a slightly rusty surface. It is a heavy sand-cast, 
probably hollow on the reverse. The head is bolted to a 
polished bronze backplate with a high polish which has been slightly 
scratched. This has bccn coarsely palntcd in large black capitals on 
its reverse `BY / A. KENRICK / BIRM: ' . 
The sculpture is kept in the Heberden Coin Room as part of the 
collection of colonel Michael H. Grant, purchased in 1953. 
In Britain during the nineteenth century there were numerous 
attempts at casting in iron sculpture which would normally 
have been reproduced in bronze, but few of these casts even 
approached the quality associated with the royal foundry in 
Berlin and certainly this portrait, presumably dating from the 
last three decades of the century (to judge by the appearance 
of the queen), is as dull as a cast as it is routine as a model. 
It is dated to 1887 in Grant's manuscript catalogue (p.185). 
109
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Bryan ENEALE (b.1930) 
529. Trio 
15.I cms. (length) 
Bronze with a mottled brown to yellow patina. Unique solid cast, 
sawn and reassembled. The cut surfaces retain the tcxturc of the 
saw. The curved outer surfaces retain evidence of the rotatory 
polisher. Stanpcd `B.K.' in an irregular portion of inserted metal 
on the outside of the smallest of the three principal pieces. 
From the collection of Christopher Hewett ( 1938-83). Given to 
the museum by his family in June 1985 and included in the 
exhibition celebrating the Sft held in the MCAlpinc Gallery in January 
and February 1987. Kneale had exhibited nineteen sculptures at the 
Taranman Gallery in June and July 1977. 
Kneale stopped work as a painter in 1959 and, after learning 
to weld, moved to a forge in Fulham in 1960, and began to 
make abstract sculpture, working directly and with the latest 
technology in stccl, and subsequently brass, gunmetal, and 
bronze. Notes made at the time the Hewett Collection was 
first discussed dated this work to 1979. There is an instructive 
interview between the artist and Bryan Robertson pubhshed 
in the catalogue of the exhibition Bry&# KceG¢/G.. Sc#/Pf#7icf 
J959-j966 at the Whitcchapel Art Gallery 1966 and a profile 
of the sculptor by John Spurling entitled `Working from 
Within' appeared in RA, the magazine of the Friends of the 
Royal Academy (Sept. 1988), 27-8. 
Ilo 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
LEEDS POTTERY (Hartley, Greens and Co. ) 
530 and 531. Pair of vase 
candlestands 
31.7cms. (height of both); 16.6cms. (length from nose to nose 
of hcrm maidens); 8.9 cms. (length and width of plinths) 
Creamware with a glaze, which is green where gathered in the swags 
and at the top of the stems (especially on 530). Each vase was 
assembled from five separately cast components before firing: the 
plinth (closed when inspected from below); the stem; the body of 
the vase (made from two large and two small moulds-the smaller 
ones comprising the two maidens); the domed cover; the terminal 
ball knob. The wings of the maidens and the cinquefoil rosettes on 
the projections of the comers of the plinth were separately modelled 
and applied before firing. Each vase has two square slots behind the 
necks of the maidens. The aperture is approximately I cm. square 
and continues for about 3 cms. before entering the hollow body of 
the base. There are minute chips missing from the end of the proper 
left wings of one of the maidens on No. 531 and from one corner 
of the plinth of the other. There is a minute firing crack in the 
cheek of one of the maidens on No. 531 and a crack in the neck of 
one of the maidens on the other. On both vases vestigial seams may 
be discerned on the stem and its base moulding and down the arms 
of the maidens. The vases are incised inside the plinths with a `1' 
(a slight tall attached) and a `6' (possibly a `9'). `C. /467/ G' and 
`C. / 468 / G' is written in black paint in both. 
I,cnt by C. D. E. Fortnum in October 1894 and bequeathed in 
1899. C. 467 and C. 468 in his catalogues. No provenance or date 
of acquisition is given in his catalogues but the vases seem to have 
been acquired after 1857 when the preliminary catalogue, in which 
they are not included, was compiled. 
Fortnum regarded these vases as `Roman Volpato about 1800' 
although he was aware of a connection with a British ceramic 
factory, noting in his large catalogue `The form is copied or 
adapted from a Chelsca modcl'. C. F. Bell annotating the 
large catalogue observed that 
the form, whatever its origin, was copied both at Derby-in 
porcelain-nd at I,eeds in pottery. Sir Wollaston Franks did not 
feel sure that they were Italian, did not see any reason why they 
should not be English. The exact resemblance of the glaze, with 
the strongly marked greenish tinge visible where it has coagulated, 
to that upon the group of st. Joseph is however in favour of these 
having been made at Volpato's factory. 
The resemblance to the Sf/ofcp¢ (No.107 and marked as by 
Volpato) is indccd remarkable. `Professor Church', Bell 
continues, `carefully examining (February 1903 ) the similar 
vase in the V 8c A and yet another of the same pattern sold 
as Liverpool ware at Christic's (Feb. 27 1903) expressed a 
decided opinion that they were of inferior quality, from a 
technical point of view, to English work giv were probably all 
of Roman manufacture.' Church was wrong, however, and 
Bell, in his H¢»dhoofe G„¢.de of 1909 (p. 99), described the 
vases as `probably English, Staffordshirc or Yorkshire make'. 
The vase in the Victoria and Albert Museum (838-1870), 
Which matches the Ashmolean's vases in every respect except 
the green tinge to the daze, is marked LP for Leeds Pottery 
and the model appears in the Lccdr Po#Gry P4r#Grce Boofe (first 
edition of 1783nd; no.116 in the edition of 1794), as well as 
in the albums of drawings kept by the pottery, as is recorded 
in the entry for the vase of this type (perhaps the one sold at 
Chistie.s .\n \903) .in the Catalo2que Of creammare and Other 
English Pottery at Tem2le Non!sam Hott§e, Ijeedsdy Pevf=[ 
Walton (Bradford and I.ondon, 1976), 126-7, no. 489. 
In none of the four recorded versions of the vase have the 
slender S-curved branches of twisted form supporting fluted 
nozzles illustrated in the 1794 catalogue survived. They would 
have been fitted into the slots behind the winged maidens' 
necks. Such fragile projections and the relative lightness of the 
supporting body make the whole conception somewhat 
unsuitable for its purpose and strongly suggest its derivation 
from a model in stone and ormolu. The terminal maidens 
and indeed the band of anthemion suggest Slt ornaments 
applied to and apparently clasping a solid body of white 
marble or blue-john. The idea of a vase which served also as 
a candlestand was very popular with Matthew Boulton and 
the ultimate source for these Leeds vases may well be the 
`Caryatid Vases' in blue-john and ormolu which his Soho 
factory made in the early 1770s. The same form of handle is 
used in Derby porcelain, most notably in the Gibraltar Vase 
of c.1785, and on agate ware vases of chalice form impressed 
`WEDGW00D'-xamples are in the Brighton Art Gallery 
and Museum and in the City Art Gallery and Museum, 
Birmingham (2809.'85)-and on black basaltcs vases of 
similar egg form, but not designed for candles, impressed 
`WEDGWOOD AND BENTLEY'-xamples are also in 
Birmingham ( 1761.'80 and 2746.'85).
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
112 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknown foundry 
After Frederick, I.ord LEIGHTON, PRA ( 1830-96) 
532. Athlete stniggling with a 
python 
54.3 cms. (height including integral bronze plinth); 4.5 cms. 
(height of plinth); 29.5 cms. (length of plinth); 20.7 cms. (width 
of plinth) 
Bronze with a dark green and brown patina. Hollow, sand-cast. No 
joins are apparent. `F. LEIGHTON 1877' is chiselled on the proper 
left face of the bronze plinth. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
No. 33 in the receipt prepared by Andrew Shirley in January 1927, 
as `Hercules struggling with a Cobra'. 
It is not certain when I.cighton began to make small clay 
skctchcs in preparation for his large figure compositions, but 
the group of studies for his painting D#phacp4ori¢ (Ledy 
Ijcver Art Gallery, Port Sunlight) of 1874nd arc the earliest 
sculptures by him to have survived. The idea of this figure of 
the A£4/GfG is said to have come to him at that date-perhaps 
with the heroic nude male struggling with snakes in the 
foreground of Titian's B¢cc¢G¢f ¢»¢ Ar¢.¢¢„c in the National 
Gallery half in mind. He made a sketch about 9± inches high 
of which several casts in plaster and bronze survive (one such 
in plaster is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, A. 38-1954). 
Jules Dalou (see Nos. 269-73) who had suddenly shot to 
fame in England encouraged Leighton to execute the figure 
life-size. The model was prepared over the winter of 1874- 
5, using Angelo Colorossi as model, in the studio of Thomas 
Brock, a protege of Leighton, who gave some assistance. This 
large version was cast in bronze in December 1876 and 
exhibited at the Royal Academy in the following summer 
when it was purchased for the Tate Gallery out of the Chantrey 
Bequest (No.1754, on loan to Leighton House). The bronze 
was shown at the International Exhibition in Paris in 1878 
and awarded a Gold Medal. A marble version of the origival 
plaster was presented to the Royal Academy in 1886. The 
bronze reductions seem to have been made in large numbers 
and arc in many public collections including the Walker Art 
Gallery, Liverpool, the City Art Gallery, Birmingham, and 
the National Museum of wales. (See R and L. Ormond, 
Io7id lrf?¢j¢fo„ (New Haven, Conn., and London,1975), 
934, 162-3; S. Beattie, 7%e N¢ia7 Sc#/Pf„7.c (New Haven, 
Conn., and I.ondon,1983), 260, n. 53.) Some of the casts 
arc chiselled not only with the artist's mmc and the date, as 
here, but with a Roman numeral and the following `puBD By 
ERNEST BROWN & PHILLIPS / AT THE LEICESTER GALLERIES 
LEICESTER/ SQUARE, LONDON.' (See for instance Christie's, 
London, 25 Scptcmbcr 1986, lot 173, numbered XXVI, 
subsequently with the dealer Peter Nahum of 5 Ryder Street. ) 
A plaster version of no special quality but inscribed `Given to 
me by Leighton about two months bcforc he dicd', followed 
by the monogram of Thomas Armstrong the painter, was lot 
230 at Sothcby's, I.ondon, 16 December 1987. 
113
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry of J. W. Singer and Son, Frome, Somcrset 
After Frederick, Ijord LEIGHTON, PRA ( 1830-96) 
533. The Sluggard 
52.2 cms. (height including integral plinth); 3.5 cms. (height of 
plinth); 16.5 cms. (length of plinth); 14.7cms. (width of plinth) 
Bronze with a chestnut to dark brown patina. Hollow, sand-cast. 
The separately cast plinth reveals when reversed the iron armature 
from the interior of both legs. `THE sLUGGARD' is chisellcd on the 
front face of the bronze plinth. `FoUNDED By I. W. slNGER & 
SoNS / FROME SoMERSET.' is chiselled on the proper left face of the 
bronze plinth. `Fred Leighton' is incised in the model across the 
proper right back comer of the plinth on the upper surface. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
No. 32 in the receipt prepared by Andrew Shirlcy in January 1927, 
as `A Statuette Nude Male standing stretching his arms . . . by Fred 
Leighton.' 
Ijci\givton' s Athlete avdeening fhom sleeping (to give it its 
origival title), said to have origivated in the sight of his model 
Giuseppe Valona stretching after a sitting, existed as a model 
by 1882 but was only exhibited as a life-size figure at the 
Royal Academy in 1886 (no.1921). The origival plaster 
(perhaps the figure then exhibited) was prescntcd to the 
Royal Academy by the artist's sisters in 1896. A bronze cast 
was acquired at the artist's studio sale (8-10 July 1896, lot 
107b) by Henry Tatc and presented to the Tate Gallery. It is 
now on loan to Leighton House. (R and L. Ormond, Iond 
114 
I€¢j¢fo# (New Haven, Conn., and I.ondon,1975),167.) 
The statuette reproduces a `rough sketch in plaster' perhaps 
of 1882. The edition must have bccn very large and versions 
are very common. Many arc chiscllcd `Publishcd by Arthur 
Leslie Collie / 398 Old Bond Strcct London' with the dates 
6 May 1889 and 1 May 1890, as well as with the name of 
Singer's foundry. Collie evidently sold the copyright to the 
founders whose catalogue, of about 1914, fcaturcs a cast 
`from the signed model, by the late I.ord I.cighton, of which 
wc hold the copyright' (cited by S. Bcattic, T77e N,ov Sc#/pf#7c 
(New Haven, Conn., and I.ondon, 1983), 260 n. 59). When 
the founder's name only appears, thcrcfore, as in this case, the 
cast is likely to be later. A cast stamped `M' and given by 
Morris Singer to a friend in 1936 was sold at Sothcby's, 
I.ondon, 16 December 1987. It is possible that casts were 
still being made at that date. An idea of what was considered 
as an appropriate setting and pedestal for the figure may be 
obtained from an illustration to an article by Edmund Gosse 
on small domestic bronzes in A4l¢g¢z¢.72e a/47? ( 1895), 372 
(reproduced in S. Beattie, op. cit. 190). The patina of this 
bronze is often a very pale golden brown as in the version in 
the Victoria and Albert Museum (820-1901). The 
personification of sculpture in Brock's monument to Ileighton 
in St Paul's Cathedral holds a diminutive version of this 
figure. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Richard Cockle LUCAS ( 1800-83) 
534. Bust portrait of a boy 
33 cms. (height); 9 cms. (height of socle) 
Wax, ivory in colour on the chest but yellow on much of the face. 
Thcrc are cracks across the proper right side of the chest and the 
neck. The bust has also been broken into pieces and rejoined with 
a ccmcnt some of which has fallen out-the lines of the join are 
clear in front of the proper left ear and into the hair, also behind 
the neck and in the hollow behind the chest. The surface is dented 
and scratched and much surface dirt has gathered in these hollows 
as well as in cracks and joins. The bust is mounted on a turned and 
waisted socle of ebonized wood which cannot be origival. 
Bequeathed by Mrs Leverton Harris in 1939 together with the 
VG.7ig¢.» ¢"d Cb¢./d after Sansovino (No. 85). 
The bust was acquired as a work by Lucas and the attribution 
is likely to have come from the family of the boy depicted: 
there seems no reason to question it. Lucas exhibited at the 
Royal Academy betwccn 1829 and 1859 but it is seldom 
possible to know for certain whether the works he exhibited 
were of wax, ivory, clay, plaster, or marble in all of which 
media he worked. A `modcl of a child' was exhibited by him 
in 1830 (no.1130) and in 1833 a `Bust of Miss Bury, 
daughter of I.ady Charlotte Bury', but child portraiture seems 
not to have been a specially important category for hin. 
Lucas is now chiefly remembered in connection with the 
Berlin I/o#¢. Wilhelm von Bode published this as a work by 
Leonardo but it was claimed that Lucas made it and it had 
certainly been in his studio. See F¢&c? 7Z7c A# a/D#Gpf¢.o#, 
cd. Mark Jones, British Museum (I.ondon, 1990), 303-7. 
115
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
RIchard Cockle LUCAS ( 1800-83) 
535. Bust portrait of D. C. Read 
77.2 cms. (height including socle) 
Plaster of Paris, covered with a light coat of pale grey paint now 
discoloured to a brown grey. Thick walled, hollow cast. There are 
vestigial seams in the top of the head. Chips are missing to proper 
left of edge of chest. `D C READ' is scratched in the surface of the 
supporting trunk of plaster rising from the socle through the hollow 
of the back. 
Given by Chambers Hall in 1855. Added at the end of the list of 
his gift on page 47 of the University Gallery's Donations Book 
( 1842-1906) as `A model Bust of D. C. Read by Lucas'. The manner 
in which it is added to the list, together with a folio volume of 
pencil sketches, presented by Read's widow, shows that the bust 
arrived after the rest of the gift, indeed after Hall's death later in 
1855. In the Department's accounts there is a payment of fl for `a 
Box from Mrs Reed [f¢.c] containing a bust' recorded under June 
1856. A letter from Mrs Read of 11 July 1855 mentions that Mr 
Hall wishes to send the bust and that she would like it to be safe 
in Oxford-`he bids me tell you that it is not a plaster cast but a 
solid terracotta study from the life, and sculptured by Lucas, and 
as a favour to Mr Read he charged 15 guineas for it'. 
D. C. Read ( 1790-1851) was a painter and printmaker who 
was a close friend of Chambers Hall. The distinguished 
collection of works of art which Hall gave to the University 
Galleries also included 118 etchings and 17 oils by Read. 
Rcad's wife Charlotte was evidently instrumental in directing 
Hall's collection to Oxford. She was personally responsible 
for its packagivg and transportation and for all correspondence 
with the University Galleries concerning it. Read and his wife 
are buried beside Hall at Boldrc in Hampshirc (infomation 
from a descendant of the Read family, Mr E. Stone of 186 
Clements Road, East Ham, I.ondon). There seems also to 
have been a wax bust by Lucas of Read. In his will, proved 
30 August 1851, Read bequeathed this to his second son 
Charles John Read and from him it passed to George Sidney 
Read, barrister, who left it to Edward Read Davies in whose 
possession it seems to have been in the early years of this 
century. That this was a small bust is clear from an earlier whl 
dated 13 October 1845 in which Read wrote that he gave to 
his friend William Martin Coates Esq. `the small bust of myself 
modeued in wax by Lucas the sculptor'-this he revoked 
when drafting the will of 14 May 1851, giving it instead to 
his second son. (Information on these wills has kindly been 
communicated by Mr Stone.) Gunnis's statement that the 
Ashmolean's bust is of wax is presumably based on the 
erroneous assumption that Lucas's portraits wcrc always in 
this material. For Lucas see also No. 534. 
116 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
RIchard Cockle LUCAS ( 1800-83) 
536. Circular medallion profile bust 
portrait probably of Chambers Hall 
13.8 cms. (diameter); 8 cms. (depth) 
White wax. There are chips missing at the rim, also evidence of 
cement and old adhesive. A portion of the wax at the rim between 
7 and 8 o'clock is loose. Set in a circular ebonized wooden frame 
with a gold slip. The frame is inscribed in gold letters below with 
the artist's name and dates and above `SIR HENRy RAWLINSoN' and 
`cHAMBERS HALL GIFT'. Endorsed in black paint on the canvas 
backing `CHAMBERS HALL ESQ. / PROBABLy By/ R. C. LUCAS'. The 
`Probably' has been deleted and the note added in ink: `Mentioned 
as his in Mrs Rcad's / list sent with the Chambers Hall / Collection 
1855,. 
Probably part of the gift of Chambers Hall in 1855. 
The earliest inscription on this portrait presumably identifies 
it as a portrait of Chambers Hall, the collector (for whom 
see No. 535) and the authority of this is strengthened by the 
admission of doubt concerning the artist. It must correspond 
with the `medallion likeness of Mr Hall by Lucas' which is 
no. 7 in the list of `pictures' from Hall's collection described 
by Charlotte Read as sent off to Oxford in a letter of 2 Apul 
1855. 
There must have been some confusion with the portrait of 
Rawlinson by Lucas which was known to be in the Museum, 
and someone decided to make everything clear by gold 
inscriptions on the frame. Meanwhile, however, the portrait 
of Rawlinson, presumably because it was a portrait of an 
archaeoloSst, was in the care of the Department of 
Antiquities. There is no resemblance between the two profiles. 
On the other hand this portrait does resemble other portraits 
of Hall. And it docs resemble some work by Lucas-scc, for 
instance, the portrait of Lewis Rcndel of 1851 in the 
Wenholme Gaueries, Grimsby. For Lucas see also Nos. 534 
and 535. 
117
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
RIchard Cockle LUCAS ( 1800-83) 
537. Oval medallion profile portrait 
head of Sir Henry Rawlinson 
19.5 cms. (height of wax); 15.2 cms. (width of wax); 16.8 cms. 
(height of wax visible); 13 cms. (width of wax visible); 13.8 cms. 
(height of head) 
The head is in white wax against a background of chocolate brown 
wax. The upper part of the background has warped, crinkled, and 
blistcred from accidental exposure to heat (perhaps the hot water 
pipes which were installed in the last decades of the last century). 
Set in a rectangular plaster surround, covered with vclvct (now a 
mustard yellow colour but revealed, under the frame, as origivally 
burgundy), and given a dlded wooden frame with composition 
foliate scrolls. `R C. Lucas / Sculp.' is funtly incised in an elegant 
cursive script in the wax below the cutting of the neck. In cuneiform 
script behind the head a text is boldly inscribed (partially distorted 
by the heat damage) below which these words are lightly scratched 
(as a translation) in elegant cursive script: `1 crossed 
the / Euphrates'. Attached to the pine backing of the frame is an 
old label `Sir Henry Rawlinson 1810-1895 / Diplomatist, Soldier, 
Orientalist / R C Lucas fecit.' 
Provenance unrecorded. 
Sir Henry Creswicke Rawlinson Bt. ( 1810-95) is described 
as the `Fathcr of Assyriology'. His interests in the subject 
developed during his military service in Iran and Afthanistan 
between 1833 and 1844. At considerable personal danger he 
transcribed the great rock inscription of Darius I in Western 
Iran the text of which was published by the Royal Asiatic 
Society. The portrait looks as if it should be dated to the 
1840s or 1850s on the uncertain evidcncc of the sittcr's 
apparent age and there are no stylistic reasons for doubting 
this. The setting of the portrait in an imitation of an early 
eighteenth-century French frame is typical of the mid-nineteenth 
century but the improvised manner in which it 
has been done here suggests that the artist did not supervise 
it. For Lucas see also Nos. 534nd. 
jJAI-
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry of E. Gruct, 44 avenue de Chatillion, Paris 
After Sir Edgar Bertram MACKENNAL Kcvo, RA ( 1863- 
1931) 
538. Diana wounded 
36.9 cms. (height) 
Bronze, highly polished, with a dark brown and dark green patim. 
Hollow, sand-cast in several pieces (see below). `8 Mackennal' with 
no stops and a tall to the last letter underlining the last part of the 
name, with the date `1905' above, is incised in the model on the 
integral naturalistic base to proper right of the figure. Within the 
hollow base are evident the iron armatures for the legs, a paper label 
in the shape of a heart inscribed `HH4', and the seal of the founder: 
`E GRUET JEUNE FONDEUR 44 AVENUE DE CHATILLION'. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in November 1926. 
No. I I in Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927. 
A cast of this statuette was exhibited in 1906 at the Royal 
Academy Exhibition (no.1648). A larger version, a `statue', 
presumably of plaster, was exhibited there in 1907 (no.1841 ), 
and a statue in marble at the Exhibition of 1908 (no.1974) 
which was purchased out of the Chantrey Bequest Fund (Tatc 
Gallery, in store). The bronze statuettes exist in great 
numbers. They differ from the marble in the trcatmcnt of the 
hair and the creasing of the belly, and do not employ the 
tree-trunk support. In some bronzcs divisions may be 
discerned in the upper part of the figurc's right thigh and 
right arm (as in version which was lot 93 at Christie's, Ijondon, 
24 September 1987), but none is visible in this case. Gruet's 
stamp is not always concealed: it is sometimes placed below 
the signature (as in the example just cited and in another 
bronze sold at Sotheby's, I.ondon, I October 1986). The 
method of securing the feet to the base also varies. The Gruct 
foundry cast work for Macmonmies and Saint-Gaudcns, so it 
was used to taking orders from abroad (Mackennal had 
settled in I.ondon by this date). At least one other Parisian 
foundry cast this model: some casts arc chiselled at the lowest 
part of the base below the signature `HOHWILLER FONDEUR 
(see, for example, Christic's, I.ondon, 29 September 1988, 
lot 253). 
What M. H. Spielmann observed of Mackennal in his 
British Scttlpture and Scttl2tors Of To-Day (Tcondon, L90L) , 
135, seems particularly pertinent in connection with this 
figure: `a good deal of Mr Mackcnnal's elegance seems to 
have been instilled into him in Paris'. However, his inspiration 
must have been German sculpture in which the motif of the 
twisted nude reaching down to his or her lower leg was so 
commonly repeated in the first years of the twentieth century: 
the S¢"d¢/4¢.#dcr of 1901 by Nikolaus Friedrich ( 1865- 
1914), the S¢#d¢/4¢.#de7?.7e of 1901 by August Kraus ( 1868- 
1934), the B¢dc7¢de A4l¢dc¢c7c of 1902 by Wilhelm Lehmbruck, 
and the S¢»de/c„b¢.„der¢.# of 1906 by Arthur Lewin-Funckc 
are all sinflar (8. Hffler, R¢e¢.7¢/¢7¢¢ We:for#/c" #"d ¢¢.c 
Berliner Bildhanerschule des 19. jahrhunderts (Modelne 
Galerie, Quadrat Bottrop, and Schloss Cappenbcrg, 1984), 
113,150,165,166). 
119
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Sir Edgar Bertran MACKENNAL Kcvo, RA ( 1863-1931 ) 
539. Sappho 
28.7 cms. (height including integral base); 23.8 cms. (length of 
integral base); 16,5 cms. (width of integral base); 6.4 cms. (height 
of plinth); 25.9 cms. (length of plinth); 20 cms. (width of plinth) 
White Carrara marble. Chiselled to proper left of the integral 
naturalistic base `8 Mackennal' with no stops and a tail to the last 
letter underlining the last part of the name. Mounted on a plinth of 
pale green slightly banded onyx. 
Presented by the sculptor's daughter Mrs C. A. Kraay in 1952, the 
year in which her son Colin Mackennal Kraay became an Assistant 
Keeper in the Hebcrden Coin Room. Registered (on 13 November) 
and listed in the A#7¢#¢/ RGPo# ( 1952), 48, as `Scated Female 
Figure'. 
The statuette was exhibited at the Royal Academy Exhibition 
in 1909 (no.1836, S¢¢pfro, illustrated in Rayro/ Ac¢deny 
P¢.cf#71cJ ( 1909),121 ). It seems to have rcmaincd in the artist's 
possession (unless more than one version of it was carved) for 
it was included in the Fine Art Society's Memorial Exhibition 
Of Stati4ettes ky the Late Sir Bertram Macheunal .in May \932 
(as no.I ), and was exhibited in the Co7„oweowo7fl}fG.pc 
Eichibition Of. Works ky Late Members cLt che Ttoval AlcaLderny 
in the following year (no. 802, lent by Lady Mackcnnal). The 
theme of a compact female nude seated or crouching, 
wrapped in thought, was popular in the French sculpture with 
which Mackennal, who had worked in Paris in Rodin's studio 
in the early l880s and again in the 1890s on his rctum from 
his native Australia, was very finiliar. S¢4pfo may be regarded 
as a version of Dalou's Ve'7¢.fg' owc'co7¢»"G (probably cxecutcd 
in the l890s and available from 1903 in 4¢.fc#G.£ de Sforcf as 
well as bronze) only tidier in form and less desperate in 
emotion. Closely related works are the B¢#¢c7' of 1904 by 
Bcla Lyon Pratt (reserve collection, Fogg Art Museum, 
Harvard University,1939.308) and the nude by Constantin 
Dimitriadis, also dated 1909 (versions of both this and the 
Dalou were lots 153 and 154 at Christie's, I.ondon, 28 
January 1988, illustrated). A bronze by Mackcnnal with the 
same title as this was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1921 
(no.1195). It is entirely different in conception and represents 
a nude woman leaning back against a rock.
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
122 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknown foundy 
After Sir Edgar Bertram MACKENNAL Kcvo, RA ( 1863- 
1931) 
540. King George V in naval 
uniform 
20.5 cms. (height); 6 cms. (height of marble base) 
Bronze, with a brown patina. Hollow, probably lost-wax, cast. 
Incised `8. Mackennal' in the model across the base of the hollowed 
back. Bolted to a block of black marble, cubic but with a curved 
front face. 
Given to the Hcberden Coin Room in 1982 by Mrs Kraay, in 
memory of her husband Colin Mackennal Kraay (b.1918; d. 27 
January 1982; Keeper of the Coin Room 1975-82) who was the 
sculptor' s grandson. 
Mackennal's contacts with the royal family had been 
established by his work first on the coronation medals for 
George V and Queen Mary in May 1911. He was then chosen 
to mckc both the equestrian statue of King Edward VII for 
Waterloo Place and the recumbent effigy for Windsor. 
Another version of the bust was in the collection of Sir Leon 
and Iddy Trout (sold Christie's, at their home, Everton Park, 
Brisbane, 6-7 June 1987, lot 63a). This was dated 1911 and 
was mounted on a tapering chamfercd marble pedestal with 
ormolu mounts (53 cms. in height with the bust) which must 
have been dcsigncd by or for the sculptor. This bust with 
pedestal (or an identical repetition) was lot 102 at Sotheby's, 
Ijondon, on 30 March 1990. 
123
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknown foundry 
After Sir Edgar Bertram MACKENNAL Kcvo, RA ( 1863- 
1931) 
541. Betty 
31.8 cms. (height, excluding base); 17.7 cms. (height of base); 
15 cms. (length and width of base) 
Bronze with a slightly green to dark brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax, 
cast. `MACKENNAL' chiselled on the metal at the back of the 
neck. Mounted on a base of black marble. 
Presented by the sculptor's only daughter Mrs C. A. Kraay in 1952, 
the year in which her son Colin Mackennal Kraay became an 
Assistant Keeper in the Heberden Coin Room. Registered on 13 
November and listed in the A7¢»#¢/ RcPo7¢ ( 1952), 48, as `portrait 
bust'. 
The sculpture was cxhibitcd at the Royal Academy in 1925 
(no.1391, BGrty, illustrated in Ray#/ Ac¢dcowy I//#ffr¢£G¢ 
( 1925),128). Other female busts with similady finiliar names 
Uo¢„ and A4l¢7/.o7?.c) were exhibited in the same year. The bust 
seems to have remained in the artist's possession (unless more 
than one cast was made of it), for it was included in the Fine 
Art Society's Memorial Exhibition of Sfzzf„c#Gf ky £¢e Lefg S¢.r 
Bc#7i¢ow A4l¢c&G"»¢/ in May 1932 (as no.13), and was 
ex].jib.ited in the Commemorative lhahibition Of Works ky Late 
Meow4cgrf at the Royal Academy in the following year (no. 238, 
lent by Ijady Mackennal). 
124 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Baron Carlo MAROCHETTI RA ( 1805nd7) 
542. Model for the tomb of princess 
Elizabeth Stuart ( untraced) 
61 cms. (2 feet) (length) 
Stone and bronze. 
In the Donations Book for 1892 George Wyatt (son of the donor 
of Roubiliac's owode//a for the Handel monument-No. 565) is 
recorded as having given `Marochetti's tomb model of Princess 
Elizabeth'. It is recorded as 2 feet in length. In the i4ce„"a/ Rcporf 
of the Curators Of the University Galleries Of the idilowing yea.I (p. \) 
it is given as a bequest: `a small model in stone of the tomb of 
Princess Elizabeth, with figure in bronze by Baron Marochetti'. The 
minutes of the Curators of the University Galleries reveal that it was 
officially accepted on 2 February 1893 (p.120) but also that the 
stonework had been `damaged for want of care in packing' (p.123). 
I have found no other subsequent archival reference to the model 
and the model itself has not been traced. 
Marochetti was trained as a sculptor in Paris, studied in Rome 
in the 1820s, exhibited at the Paris Salon after 1827, and 
obtained major commissions in both Italy and France, 
including the colossal bronze statue of Duke Emanuele 
Filiberto for his native Turin (cast in Paris in 1833, erected in 
Turin in 1838) and the great marble altarpiece of the 
Madelcine in Paris ( 1841). In 1848 hc followed King Louis-
Philippe into exile in England where he commenced 
exhibiting in 1851. Hc enjoyed the patronage of the British 
royal family, obtained major public commissions, and enjoyed 
a flourishing practice as a portraitist-his experience working 
in bronze as well as his international reputation compensating 
for the hostility of British artists and critics. The `Princcss 
Elizabeth' referred to is, as Philip Ward-Jackson pointed out 
to mc, the daughter of King Charles I. She died in 1650 when 
in captivity in Carisbrook Castle on the Isle of wight. Her 
monument was erected `as a token of respect for her virtues 
and sympathy for her misfortunes' by Queen Victoria in St 
Thomas, Ncwport (Isle of wight) where she was buried. The 
drl is represented in marble stretched out in her fine clothes 
as if asleep, a huge Bible serving as her pillow. The prison 
bars arc indicated in relief in the Gothic niche in which the 
tomb is set. The tomb was complete by December 1856 when 
the queen visited it. Marochetti had been first approached in 
the summer of 1854 concerning the commission. Miss Pamela 
Clark, Deputy ReSstrar of the Royal Archives at Windsor 
Castle, who has supplied these dates also points out that there 
is a payment of£35 to Marochetti in February 1858 for a 
`copy' of the monument which had been supplied to the 
queen `beforc Christmas'. This may well be a rcfcrence to 
the model. 
Baron Carlo Marochctti, Monument to Princess Elizabeth, St. Thomas, Newport 
( Photo courtesy of the Conway Library, Courtauld Institute of Art) 
125
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Royal College of Art foundry 
Bcrnard MEADOWS (b.1915) 
543. Help 
13.6 cms. (height); 40 cms. (length); 15 cms. (width) 
Polished bronze. Hollow, lost-wax cast in thrcc pieces, bolted 
together, the larger cubic piece open below. Chiselled in the metal: 
` ® 0/6' on the underside of the cubic piccc. 
From the collection of Christopher Hcwctt ( 1938-83). Given to 
the Museum by his finily in June 1985 and included in the 
exhibition celebrating the dft held in the MCAlpinc Gallery in January 
and Fchruary 1987 (no. 98 in the catalogue). Two other sculptures 
by Meadows (Nos. 544, 545) wcrc also included in the Sft together 
with twelve drawings. Meadows had exhibited at Hcwett's 
Taranman Gallery in 1975 and 1978. 
This bronze was cast in 1970 in an edition of six with one 
additional artist's cast (opus 92). There is a version nearly 
twice as large which was cast in an edition of the same size in 
1964 (opus 81 ) of which one example is in Bristol City Art 
Gallery and Museum, presented to the Gallery partly by the 
Museum's Friends in 1969. The sculpture is typical of the 
abstract work composed of interlocked elcmcnts with strong 
anatomical associations which the followers of Henry Moorc 
favoured. The sculptor supervised both the casting and 
polishing. 
ffi==is=Tng=L:-rfeRE =.`_i`.`. 
126 
Royal College of Art foundry 
Bernard MEADOWS (b.1915) 
544. Frightened figure 
29.2 cms. (height of bronze); 4.2 cms. (height of plinth); 
19.5 cms. (length of plinth); 15.7 cms. (width of plinth) 
Polished bronze. Hollow, lost-wax cast in three pieces, bolted 
together. The smaller bulbous clemcnts are more highly polished. 
Mounted on a plinth of travertinc. 
From the collection of Christopher Hcwett ( 1938T83). Given to 
the Museum by his finfty in June 1985 and included in the 
cxhibitioncelcbratingtheSfthcldinthcMCAlpincGalleryinJanuary 
and February 1987 (no. 97 in the catalogue). Two other sculptures 
by Meadows (Nos. 543, 545) were also included in the aft together 
with twelve drawings. Meadows had exhibited at Hewett's 
Taranman Gallery in 1975 and 1978. 
The sculpture was made in 1976. There was an edition of six 
casts with one additional artist's cast. The sculptor supervised 
both the casting and polishing. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
ife ,` .,-,..-.. '-, i 
127
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Royal College of Art foundry 
Bernard MEADOWS (b.1915) 
545. Watchers 
23.3 cms, (height); 29 cms. (Length) 
Polished bronze. Hollow, lost-wax cast in three pieces, bolted 
together, the cubic piece open below. Chiselled in the metal: ` ® 
1/6' on the underside of the latter where sawn off. 
From the collection of Christopher Hewctt ( 1938-83). Given to 
the Museum by his family in June 1985 and included in the 
exhibition celebrating the gift held in the MCAlpine Gallery in January 
and February 1987 (no. 99 in the catalogue). Two other sculptures 
by Meadows (Nos. 543, 544) were also included in the aft together 
with twelve drawings. Meadows had exhibited at Hewett's 
Taranman Gallery in 1975 and 1978. 
The sculpture was cast in 1979 in an edition of six with an 
artist's cast. A unique cast of a version twice as large is in the 
Open Air Museurn, Hakone, Japan. The sculptor supervised 
both the casting and polishing. 
128 
Paul Raphael MONTFORD FRBs ( 1868-1838) 
546. Victor Rienaecker 
37.6 cms. (height); 17.2 cms. (length at base moulding); 
11.3 cms. (width at base moulding) 
Bronze with a dark brown to chestnut patina, grey-green in the 
decpcr hollows. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. Incised on the back of the 
bust in a cursive script in the model: `Paul R. Montford / 1922 Sc.' 
Unknown provenance. Presumably presented by the sitter or in his 
honour or memory. 
Montford, the son of Horace Montford, also a sculptor, won 
the Royal Academy gold medal and travel studentship in 
1891. In 1898 he was appointed modelling master at Chelsea 
Polytechnic. Montford's most notable achievements are in 
the field of large architectural decoration-n Battcrsca Town 
Hall (designs exhibited 1894), Cardiff City Ham and Law 
Courts (design exhibited in 1903, model in 1905), the Royal 
College of science and Technology (model cxhibitcd in 
1916), and, in bronze, the four groups on the Kelvin Way 
Bridge, Kclvingrove Park, Glasgow (exhibited in 1917 and 
1918). This portrait must bc one of his last works executed 
in the country for he emigrated to Australia in the same year 
(whcrc he executed among other works the gable relief for 
the Melbourne War Memorial). In its vulnerable pensive 
mood and sketchy finish it resembles the earliest portrait by 
him to have come to my attention: the curious medallion dated 
1893 with an easel-shaped ground (Sotheby's, I.ondon, 18 
March 1987, lot 174-no.1690 in the Academy Exhibition 
of 1893). The portrait of RIenaecker may have been the 
`portrait bust, bronze' which Montford exhibited at the Royal 
Academy in 1922 (no.1345). But Geoffrey Giddings, in the 
survey of Montford's work published in A„c4G.£gcf'f /o„#g¢/ 
for December 1922 (56: 789-92), observed that Montford 
had `some fifty' busts to his credit. 
Victor RIenaecker was appointed to succeed the Hon. A. 
Shirley in 1929 as Assistant Keeper of the Department of 
Fine Art. He had, previous to this date, been a generous 
benefactor of the Museum, lending watercolours in 1924 and 
1925, for example. Hc resigned in July 1931 shordy after Bell 
and was replaced by Ian Robertson in 1932. He remained a 
fiend of the Department to which he made Sfts in 1953. 
129
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Alexander MUNRO ( 1825-71 ) 
547. Profile portrait of John 
Everett rmllais 
56 cm. (height within frame); 45.5 cms. (width within frame); 
67.5 cms. (height of frame); 57 cms. (width of frame) 
Plaster of Paris. The artist's monogram (an interlaced A and M) is 
scratched below the truncation of the neck. `ALEX. MUNRo. Sc' is 
scratched on the truncation itself. The relief is set in its original 
frame: a reverse moulding of ebonizcd wood with a gold slip. 
Given by Dr Acland on 16 Dcccmber 1856 (Minutes of the Curators 
of the University Galleries, p. 31) shordy after No. 548. For Acland 
see No. 549. Placed on exhibition in the newly decorated Combe 
Gallery in 1988, having been in storage for about half a century. 
The portrait was exhibited-in what medium is not clear-at 
the Royal Academy in 1854 (no. 1523). A version of 
uncertain medium is said to be in the collection of Sir Ralph 
Miuais, another, also of plaster, less sharp and less clear, and 
in a fat laurel wreath frame, is in the National Portrait Gallery, 
I.ondon (no. 4959, given by the artist's granddaughter Mrs 
Katharine Macdonald in 1973), and another plaster (without 
130 
the monogram) belonged in 1969 to Mrs Dorothy Walker 
of Ncwburgh, Fife (letter in the Department's archive of 22 
January 1969). A xerox of an old reproduction of the 
medallion portrait enclosed by Mrs Walker has a caption 
identifying it as `from the marble' and dating it to 1853-it 
is indeed likely that the model was commenced even if not 
completed in that year. 1854 is the date which appears on 
the most exquisite of all Munro's medallion portraits in c¢po 
r¢./¢.ova-that of the wife of the donor of the Ashmolcan's 
plaster, Sarali Acland, of which the marble origival, framed in 
Verom marble, was, after her death in 1878, adopted for her 
monument in Christ Church Cathedral, and of which a marble 
replica, framed in Siena marble, was placed in the entrance 
ham of the Acland Nursing Home in Oxford founded in her 
memory. Medallion portraits of ladies were, it seems, a 
speciality of the artist in the early 1850s-nc of I,ady 
Constancc Grosvenor in marble had bccn exhibited at the 
Academy in 1853 (no. 1460) and one of I.ady Alwyne 
Compton was also exhibited in 1854 (no. 1524)-nd the 
portrait of Mfllais has a softness in its curls and a delicaey in 
its profile worthy of these. 
Alexander MUNRO ( 1825-71 ) 
548. Profile medallion portrait of 
the Revd Dr Henry Wellesley 
54 cms. (diameter of marble as visible); 74.3 cms. (height and 
width of frame) 
Carrara marble, slightly stained with grey and rusty patches, also 
discoloured with some surface dirt. The artist's monogram (an A 
and M interlaced, but without the cross-bar of the A in this case) is 
chiselled below the truncation of the neck. The relief is set in its 
original frame: a plain flat oak border with spandrels of deal, with a 
sanded texture, gilded, now opening at the joins. A brass plaque 
on the frame is engraved: `HENRICI. WELLESLEy. S T.P /ARTTUM. 
ELEGANTIUM. FAVTORIS. CULTISSIMI / HANG. IMAGINEM. 
ECTYPAM / S_OCIETAS. OXON. ARTIBUS. COLENDIS. DEDITA / FAG. 
CUR. ;As fro cccLVI. ' 
Commissioned, as the inscription above makes clear, in 1856, the 
portrait was presented by members of the Oxford Art Society to 
the University Galleries in 1857 as is recorded in the manuscript 
Donations Book, p. 48. The Minutes of the Curators of the 
University Galleries (p. 31) indicate that the ctft was proposed on 
the Socicty's behalf by the Revd George Butler and accepted on 11 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
November 1856. Exhibited in the galleries in the nineteenth century, 
but in rcccnt decades kept in basement storage, the relief was placed 
on exhibition in the newly decorated Combc Gallery in 1988. 
The portrait was exhibited by Munro at the Royal Academy 
in 1856 (no.1279, `Marblc Medauion of Rev. Dr. Wellesley 
Principal of New Inn Hall, Oxford, President of Oxford Art 
Society'). Wellesley, more than any other senior member of 
the University, was responsible for securing for the University 
Gaueries Sir Thomas Lawrcnce's collection of drawings by 
Raphael and Michclangclo and it was this, above all, that the 
commission and presentation of this portrait commemorated. 
The Art Society's attention had perhaps been drawn to Munro 
by his mcdahion portraits of Mrs Acland of 1854 (for which 
see No. 547) and of Master Henry Acland (exhibited at the 
Royal Academy in 1855, no. 1485), for Henry Acland, this 
boy's father (No. 549) was after Wellesley perhaps the most 
influential figure in the cultural life of the University. Acland 
himself presented Munro's medallion of Millais (No. 547) to 
the University Galleries a little over a month later. Wellesley 
was stiu a Curator of the Galleries in 1856. A decade later his 
place was taken by Acland. 
131
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Alcxandcr MUNRO ( 1825-71 ) 
549. Bust portrait of professor 
Henry Wentworth Acland 
67.5 cms. (height); 29 cms. (length across lowest portion of 
chest); 28 cms. (length across base); 22.3 cms. (width) 
Plaster of Paris. Hollow cast with no evident seams. The plaster has 
bccn stained to a stone colour. Minor scratches on the nose, cheek, 
edge of the shoulder, and geometrical termination of the bust reveal 
the white of the plaster. The chest is slightly mottled with mould 
stains. 
Transferred from the Bodleian Ijibrary in 19 02 . 
Munro's bust of Dr Acland was cxhibitcd as a marble at the 
Royal Academy exhibition in 1857 (no. 1280). The marble 
version-r at least a marble version-signed on the proper 
left side of the geometrical termination of the bust `ALEx. 
MUNRo. Sc. 1857', is in the Acland Nursing Home in the 
Woodstock Road, near the reception desk. It differs from 
this plaster in that the lower part of the chest is terminated in 
a briefer, more complex, but no more naturalistic manner. 
The plaster must therefore record the oriSnal clay model 
rather than reproduce the marble. The following inscription 
on the marble refers to the circumstances of its commission 
following Acland's gallant conduct to victims of a shipwreck: 
`UXORI HENRICI DYKE ACIAND M.D. / MEDICINjE 
pROFEssoRls REGII ET cLINlcALls / cusTODls BIBLloTHEcrf 
RADCLIFFIANffi / IN UNIVERSITATE OXONIENSI / IIANC 
MARITI EJUS EFFIGIEM / D.D. / AMICI IXXV / VITAM SIBI 
ACADEMlffi MULTIS PRETEREA / CARAM ET UTILEM / E 
NAUFRAGII pERIcuLO sOsplTEM / GRATUIANTEs. ' A small 
plaster version of the bust is in a private collection in Oxford 
and it is possible that an edition of such was cast for 
distribution to the grateful friends. 
Henry Acland ( 1815-1900) was one ofthc most influential, 
and attractive, figures in the University of Oxford in the 
second half of the last century. The second son ofthc politician 
and philanthropist Sir Thomas Dyke Acland ( 1787-1871 ) hc 
possessed as a young man many talents, including artistic 
ones, but, after 1840, he devoted himself chiefly to medicine. 
He was made reader in Anatomy at his old college of Christ 
Church in 1845, a Fcuow of the Royal Society in 1847, 
Radcliffe I.ibrarian, physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary, and 
Aldrichian Professor of Clinical Medicine in 1851, and ReSus 
Professor of Medicine in 1857-the year in which this bust 
was made. The bust also coincides with the building of the 
Oxford Museum (the foundation stone was laid in 1855 and 
it was opened in 1861) in the creation of which he played a 
leading part. He was made a Curator of the University 
Galleries in 1866. Acland was a close friend of John Ruskin 
and it may have been Ruskin who first drew his attention to 
Muuro. For Munro's bust of Mrs Acland see No. 547 and 
for his statues for the Oxford Museum see Nos. 550 and 551. 
Acland was created a baronet in 1890. 
132 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Alexander MUNRO ( 1825-71 ) 
550. Model for a statue of Galileo 
62.8 cms. (height including base); 3.9 cms. (height of base); 
25.1 cms. (diameter of base) 
Plaster of I'aris, coloured dark grey-black. Thick-walled, possibly 
solid cast, attached to a solid base. Some white scratches on the 
base. 
Given by Mr J. A. R. Munro in 1916. 
Munro's stone statue of Galileo was one of the series of men 
of science commissioned for the great hall of the Oxford 
University Museum c.1857. It remains in its oriSnal position 
bctwccn columns 19 and 20. There are a number of minor 
differences between it and this model: in the statue the sleeves 
are wider and the base has been cut down to a square with 
chamfered corners to match the stepped corbel support-in 
consequence the hcro's right foot projects over the edge.
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Alexander MUNRO ( 1825-71 ) 
551. Model for a statue of 
Hippocrates 
59 cms. (height including base); 3.2 cms. (height of base); 18 cms. 
(diameter of base) 
Plaster of Paris, coloured dark grey-black. Solid cast. The scroll in 
the figurc's right hand has been broken before the colouring. Some 
white scratches on the base. 
Given by Mr H. A. Munro in 1917. 
Munro exhibited `Hippocratcs; Model of a statue to be 
presented by John Ruskin, Esq„ to the New Museum at 
Oxford' at the Royal Academy in 1857 (no. 1232). The statue 
itself, carved out of stone, remains in its origival position 
between columns 6 and 7 of the University Museum. It differs 
from this model only in minor respects: the caduceus in the 
larger statue is not confined to a recessed panel on the altar 
and the base is square with chamfercd comers. 
134 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Alexander MUNRO ( 1825-71 ) 
552. Seal in the form of a bust of a 
bearded warrior 
5.1 cms. (height) 
Hone stone. The faceted end of the shaft is engraved with the initials 
DM in Gothic. The shaft is broken in two (it has been reassembled 
for photography). The artist's monogram (an A and M interlaced) 
is carved on the hollowed back of the bust. 
Given in 1947 by Amy Tetley of Ingelby, St Andrew's Place, 
Llandudno. Redstered on 21 April. Inherited by her from her father 
to whom it was given by the artist (see below). 
The letter from the donor of 17 April 1947 preserved in the 
Dcpartmcnt's archive supplies all the information there is 
about this mysterious, miniature sculpture: 
Dear Sir, After listening to that BBC charming talk on the Ashmolean 
in which the Pre-Raphaelites were given an honoured place, I 
remembered this little figure which Alec Munro carved one night 
when he and my father were having one of their night long confabs, 
and which he tossed across to him with a grin, when it was finished. 
My father was living then in Regent's Park and as they had been 
boys together in York they kept up the fuendship and spent many 
long nights together. I imagine this little greek warrior, the work 
of the Pre-Raphaelite's early sculpture might enjoy a place among 
the work of the men whom Alcc Munro had known and thought 
so much of. 
The donor, it should be noted, is unlikely to have witnessed 
the circumstances she describes. The work may date from the 
carly 1860s when the artists in the circle of Rossetti turned 
their attention to Greek subject-matter-the Trojan wars 
especially-which as medieval purists they had shunned in the 
1850s. A note in the Register reads, `From a slate pencil. 
Mrs Munro has some similar.' 
lk,.i`,,E',, 
135
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Alcxandcr MUNRO ( 1825-71 ) 
553. Bust portrait of professor 
Goldwin Smith 
62.5 cms. (height); 28 cms. (length across chest); 22.I cms. 
(width) 
Plaster of I'aris. Hollow cast, with no evident seams. The plaster has 
been stained to a stone colour but this has worn off in some areas, 
especially on the chest. The nose has been broken off and lost. Chips 
are missing from the forehead. There are mottled mould stains on 
the chest. 
Given to the University by T. W. Jackson. In the Bodleian Library 
in L9\2 (.8. ine Poole, Catalogtte Of Portraits in the Possession Of 
£4c U#;pe7TG.ty ..., i (Oxford, 1912), 127, no. 323). Transferred to 
the Ashmolean Museum at an unrccorded date. 
The subject of the bust was identified by Mrs Herta Simon 
of Park Town in the summer of 1988. She also discovered 
the marble version of the bust in the basement of the Art 
Gallery of Ontario in Toronto in which city Professor 
Goldwin Smith ( 1823-1910; Regivs professor of Modern 
History at Oxford 1855nd6) lived with his wife from 1871, 
having emigrated to Noi±h America in 1868. A photograph 
of a version of the bust identifies it as made in Oxford in 
about 1866. 
136 
:i;,,,;;fiijt,.,,`r't,j'',;+F¥.,;.I,t.irEL,",1;:,:i:1,:,'l'::::'.I:.'i:':,;:.:,i;,;,:i:':,:;;#::,,,'apL#E;:
Factory of J. NEALE, Hanley, Staffs. 
554. Vase ornamented with 
medallions, masks, and swags 
29 cms. (height including wooden plinth); 2.2 cms. (height of 
wooden plinth); 8.9 cms. (length of wooden plinth); 8,7 cms. 
(width of wooden plinth); 6 cms. (height of masks including 
drapery below the neck) 
Crcamware. The body of the vase is thrown and the foot separately 
thrown and attached before firing. The ornaments are separately 
cast and attached also before firing. There are chips missing from 
the higher rim to the belt of leaf omancnt and from the noses of 
both masks. An overlap in the applied belt of leaves around the body 
of the vase may be discerned to proper right of the medallion of 
otho. The very dark, slightly grey, blue paint is applied to the vase 
in a dense speckled pattern presumably by some mechanical device. 
The inside of the neck is also coloured. The application is irregular: 
the stem and foot appear to be an almost uniform black and the 
upper part of the neck is also very dark. Much of the gilding has 
worn off. Although now only apparent in the hollows of the leaves 
it seems origivally to have covered them complctcly, as also all the 
unpainted omamcnts except perhaps the raised ornament around 
the rim of the foot. The underside of the foot reveals a pink cream 
unglazed body. It has not been broken off. The thin bolt passing 
from inside the vase and fixing it to the plinth appears to be oridnal 
and the ebonized wooden plinth must be a replacement for a 
separately fired ceramic one of similar dimensions and colour. 
Prove nance unrecordcd. 
Wedgwood made creaniware vases painted in imitation of the 
prestigious stones associated with the Romansngranitcs, 
porphyry, scrpcntinc, pc7idG ¢»f¢.co, jJo7¢#f¢7¢£# (which he 
translated as holygate), and agates-from the late 1760s. 
Those decorated in the fashion of this vase were intended to 
represent, or rather evoke, granite, as is clear from a letter to 
his partner Thomas Bentley of 13 February 1770 in which 
Wedgwood proposed that they `call those barely sprinkled 
with blue and ornaments Slt, gr¢#G.fG'. It is clear from the 
firm's catalogues that such vases were generally sold `in pairs 
or in sets of three, five or seven' (E. Mcteyard, IZJc Wcof2grood 
H¢„dfoo¢ (I.ondon,1875) ). Wedgwood also experimented 
with making the colour integral to the ceramic body as it was 
in the minerals imitated. And of course he was also anxious 
to imitate the hardness and texture as well as the colour of 
stones: hence he called his new vitreous red stoneware `rosso 
antico', his new fine, hard black stoneware `black basaltcs', 
and his new fine, hard, white stainablc stoneware `jasper'. 
Whereas one of the medallions here has the profile portrait 
of a Roman emperor and is stamped as such (M OTHO) the 
other has the profile portrait of a woman in cightcenth-century 
dress (perhaps Catherine the Great). The somewhat 
improvised character of the ornament extends also to the 
female masks which are probably from the sane mould: both 
heads are turned slighdy in one direction which suggests that 
the origival model was dcsigncd for a different purpose. 
Wedgwood's vases of this type are gcncrally mounted on 
Plinths of black basaltes (or occasionally on ones of white 
jasper ware) which are impressed with his mark. It is easy to 
imagive that the wooden plinth in this case replaces a broken 
basaltes one. However, it seems more likely that this is one 
of the close imitations of wedgwood's vases made probably 
in about 1780 by Nealc's factory. Thcrc is a vase of the same 
shape decorated with masks and swags and medallions in the 
Victoria and Albert Museum (304-1869) which has identical 
colouring, identical Slding, and an identical size of bead 
moulding and band of scrratcd leaves between raised edges. 
It is attributed to Nealc's factory on account of its very close 
similarity to another vase which is marked `J. Neale, Hanley' 
on its basaltes plinth in the same collection ( 1614-A-1871 ). 
Ncale was the brother-in-law of Henry Palmer, the previous 
proprietor of the factory at Church Works, Hanley. Nealc's 
partner from 1786, and eventually his successor, was Robert 
Wilson, and the factory became that of `Neale and Co.' and 
then that of `Neale and Wflson' (see W. Burton, A HS.Jfory 
and Description of English Eawihenware and Stoneware 
(Ijondon, 1904), 158-9). 
137
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Oscar NEMON ( 1906-85) 
555. Half-length portrait of Sir 
Karl Parker wearing an overcoat 
55.8 cms. (height) 
Plaster of Paris, painted black to simulate bronze. A few points of 
plaster remain white. Hollow cast. 
There is no record of the circumstances in which this sculpture was 
acquired by the Department, but it is likely to have been soon after 
the rctircment of parker as Kccper in 1962. It has always been placed 
on a high bracket in the south-west comer of the Print Room. 
jin outhne of Nemon's career is given in the introduction 
written by Sir John Rothenstein for the exhibition at the 
As;)nnriohean M:use:`im Oscar Nemon: Scttlptures Of Ottr Time 
( 1982), and in the obituary in the T¢.owcj of 16 April 1985. 
Ncmon's origivs wcrc obscure. His parents came from `what 
is now Yugoslavia' but his `background and education were 
international'. Having arrived in Oxford as a refugee he 
married, in 1939, Patricial Villiers-Stuart. `Though the Queen 
and the Queen Mother were among his sitters, along with 
such notables as I.ord Beaverbrook, Sir Max Beerbohm and 
Ijord Montgomery, he is probably best remembered for his 
innumerable images of winston Churchill. ' The Department 
records include many photographs of the plaster before it was 
painted. 
Oscar NEMON ( 1906-85) 
556. Chow (Topsy) 
20.4 cms. (height, including plinth); 43.9 cms. (length of plinth); 
23.7 cms. (width of plinth) 
Plaster of Paris, painted green to simulate bronze. Hollow cast. 
Inscribed in red paint on white plaster of the interior: `Oscar 
Nemon / Presented by Miss Fielder / 1968'. 
Given by Miss H. E. Fielder of The I.ane House, Norham Road, 
Oxford, in 1968. It was offered to Mr I.owe on 20 January 1968 
and had arrived by 26 January. It was apparently given by the 
sculptor to the donor's father, Professor Fielder. 
A memorandum in the Dcpartment's archives dated 30 April 
1969 by Ion I.owe, then an Assistant Keeper in the 
Department, records a conversation with the artist in his 
studio, Friary Court, St James's Palace. 
Princess Marie Bonapartc had two Chow Chows called Topsy and 
Tattoo. O.N. made models of both. She wrote a book on them, 
and analysed the dogs, having been a pupil of Freud. Freud himself 
had one of their puppies; another puppy belonged to Princess 
Marina. The models were made about 1936, certainly before the 
War. They were exhibited in Belgium in August 1936 and life-size 
models in bronze survive in Brussels. The sculptor brought two 
plaster models to England, this one and another showing the Chows 
standing. They arc `my first dogs and my last in this life'. O.N. 
worked at the Princess's residence in Paris, and was there visited by 
the Queen of the Belgians . . . 
That, however, did not make him a good sculptor. See also 
No. 555. 
139
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Joseph NOLLEKENS RA ( 1737-1833) 
557. Idealized portrait bust of 
Maria, Mrs Henry Howard of 
Corby 
60,5 cms. (height including socle); 11 cms. (height of socle); 
21 cms. (diameter of soclc) 
Carrara marble, somewhat discoloured with dirt. There arc a few 
minute flaws in the marble, notably to proper left of the chin and 
neck. The uppermost fold of drapery is missing a few chips, as is the 
most prominent fold between the breasts, and the cnd of the drapery 
as it hangs down to proper left has been broken off. `Nollekens F!' 
is chisellcd across the supporting trunk of marble in the hollowed 
back of the bust. 
Bought at Christic's, London, 21 January 1965, lot 11, using the 
Bouch Bequest Fund. RCSstered on 28 January. The vendor was 
Major W. W. Dowding of The Manor, Manningford Bruce, Pewsey, 
Wiltshire, who recalled that he had bought the bust eight years 
previously from Alfred Spero, the sculpture dealer, at the Ijondon 
Antique Dealers Fair. Mr Spero thought that he had bought it from 
another dealer, Marcussen, but had no record of the transaction 
(letters of 26 February and 21 April 1965 and notes in the 
Department's archive). 
The tight and circulating rhythm of the drapery and the 
termination of the bust just below the breasts are entirely 
characteristic of Nollckcns, but the bust is obviously no 
ordimry portrait but rather an `anima beata' in the tradition 
of Bernini's famous ideal head, now more classical in 
treatment. The debt to the expressive heads of Niobe and 
the niobids reminds us not only that Nollekcns is known to 
have studied the antique Niobc group in Florcncc (there are 
drawings in a sketchbook in the Ashmolean) but also that hc 
actually owned a notable antique version of the head of Niobe 
which he sold to the earl of Exeter (today at Brocklesby Park, 
Lincolnshire). The no less obvious inspiration which the 
treatment of the hair owes to the bust of `Clytie' of the 
Townley Collection reminds us that Nollekens was not only 
an intimate of Townley's but was said to have frequently 
copied that bust in marble. 
The Keeper of the Department in 1965, Ian Robertson, 
was convinced that this bust was a portrait of Emma, Ijady 
Hamilton. An alleged similarity to a head on the Warwick 
Vase which Sir William Haniilton was supposed to have had 
modeued on Emma prior to selling the vase to his nephew 
`confims the identification', he wrote over-optimistically in 
the A""„¢/ Rcporf (1965: 56-7). He proposed 1791 as the 
year in which the work was exccutcd because that was the 
year of Emma's return to London from Naples when she did 
indeed sit to numerous artists. However, there is no 
contemporary record of her sitting to Nollekens and it is odd 
that thcrc is no recouection of such an important portrait in 
J. T. Smith's biography. The bust was included in the 
c;xINkjriron Lady Hamilton in Relation to the Art Of her Time 
held at Kenwood House, London, 1972 (p. 47 in the 
catalogue by Patricia Jaife ), and in 777c A77iogr¢7¢f Co""o¢.ftG"r.. 
140 
R¢.c47¢7id P¢y7¢c Kce¢j¢f, held at the Whitworth Art Gallery, 
Manchester,1982, where, however, I catalogued it (no. 61, 
p.143) as `perhaps of Emma Hamilton' with the observation 
that `The theatrical character suggests Lady Hamilton's 
accomplishments but for this reason also it can only be an 
approximate likeness, and it is not entirely certain that this 
bust represents her'. There is really no good reason to suggest 
that it docs represent her. 
The bust rescmblcs very closely indeed Maria the wife of 
Henry Howard of Corby in Nollckcns's reclining statue of 
her comforted by a personification of ReliSon-nc of his 
most beautiful and famous works-in Wethcrall Church, 
Cumberland. Mrs Howard died in childbed in 1788 and the 
monument was presumably commissioned soon afterwards, 
but the model was not exhibited at the Royal Academy until 
1800 (no.1082, `A monumental group to the memory of a 
lady who died in child-bed, supported by Religion, ctc.') and 
the marble was only erected in 1803. The similarity has 
cscapcd notice perhaps because of the angle of most of the 
photographs taken of the sculpture in Wetherall (but see N. 
Penny, `English Church Monuments to Women who died in 
chi."dleed: , ]ottrmal of the Warbttrg and Cottrtauld Institutes, 
38 (1975), pl. a, opposite p. 320). It was whouy characteristic 
of Nollekens to make a bust version as well as a full-length 
effigy (he did the same for Mrs Pclham, whose statue in the 
Brocklcsby Mausoleum, however, needed less adaptation 
since it was not reclining). The drapery and the turn of the 
head have been changed somewhat for the bust, but the face 
is the same and so is the hair in every single lock. The portrait 
must have been posthumous and the sculptor may not even 
have been given other portraits to refer to. In any case young 
wives in commemorative sculpture in this period were as 
idcalized in treatment as personifications of ReliSon. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps by Joseph NOLLEKENS ( 1737-1823) 
558. Oliver Cromwell 
60.5 cms. (height excluding socle); 13.2 cms. (height of soclc); 
22.7 cms. (diameter of soclc) 
Carrara marble. There are small chips on the edge of the armour at 
the proper left shoulder and a larger loss to the collar to proper left. 
There is a slight crack across the proper left shoulder. The bust is 
mounted on a tuned socle of Siena marble (dark mustard yellow 
flecked with grey). This does not fit the shape of the lowest portions 
of the marble bust which rest upon it and cannot be original. `o? 
CROMWELL' is chiselled on the tablet below the cutting of the chest 
above the turned socle. `E. Pierce Fecit' is chisclled on the face of 
this tablet to proper left with the last two letters `. . .it') continued 
on the reverse face. 
Bought with a fund presented by Magdalen College in 1920 from 
E. A. V. Stanley previous to the sale on 6-17 September by Morris, 
Son and Pcard of the contents of Quantock IJ)dge near Bridgwater, 
Somerset-Mr Stanley `liberally consented to reserve it from the 
auction and cede it to the museum at an agreed valuation' (A""#¢/ 
RcPo77 ( 1920) 16-17). It was purchased `towards the close of the 
first half of the last century from Harman the I.ondon dealer, by 
Henry I.abouchere, I.ord Taunton' (ibid. ). I.ord Taunton's 
collection was kept at Stoke Park, but removed to Quantock I-odgc 
after his death in 1869. In the Museum the bust was displayed as 
a companion with Picrce's bust of wren, first in the Eldon Room 
(now the Founder's Room) and subsequently in the Tapestry Gallery. 
It was removed in 1989 to the Weldon Gallery. The soclc rested 
upon a massive baluster-shaped pedestal which was transferred in 
1987 to the bust of the carl of Arundel (No. 472). This pedestal 
was described in the A7G„"¢/ RGPo7? for 1924. It was made of 
`Sicilian marble' (a slightly grey, very durable Carrara marble, known 
as Ravaccionc in Italy) `to harmonise with the old baluster base of 
the bust of wren, but . . . simpler and less sculpturcsque in character'. 
C. F. Bell had it `copied from the pillar supporting the font in St. 
Margaret's, Westminster, designed by Nicholas Stone. The front is 
ornamented with a shield of arms of the Commonwealth and 
Cromwell copied from a medal by Thomas Simon.' 
A bust of Cromwen in bronze in the Museum of London is 
signed by Pierce and dated 1672. In this portrait, the head, 
which has bccn cast separately, seems to be related to the 
mask now at Chcqucrs which has sometimes been thought 
to have been made for Cromwcll's finily in 1655 (but on 
this point see D. Piper, `The Contemporary Portraits of 
Oliver Cromwell', W¢/Po/G Soc¢.ety, 34 ( 19524), 41 ). Marble 
copies exist of which a notable one is in the Wemyss 
Collection at Gosford House. This type is much less vivid as 
a portrait than the Ashmolean's marble bust which, as Mrs 
Poole remarks, `impresses the spectator with great force as a 
portrait from lifc'. But it would be rash to conclude, with 
her, that `it belongs in all probability to the last years of health 
of the protector's life' (`Edward Picrcc the Sculptor', W¢/po/c 
SocG.rty, 11 ( 1923), 38) for vivid portraits are often made long 
after a sittcr's death. Mrs Poole also notes that this is `in all 
probability' the marble bust which Walpolc records as sold at 
auction in 1714, but there is no way of telling that it was not 
a marble copy of the 1672 bronze to which Walpole referred. 
No one sccms to have questioned the attribution of the 
142 
Ashmolean bust, and yet the chiselled lettering of Picrce's 
name is not close to that found on the London Museum 
bronze, does not fit into the side of the tablet, and is not 
seventeenth century in style. Moreover, the bust bears no 
resemblance to any other sculpture by Pierce. Busts of 
Cromwell were exceedingly popular in the eighteenth century 
and were made by all the leading sculptors: Rysbrack, 
Roubiliac, Wilton, and Nollekens. The treatment of the curls 
around the ears in this case is particularly close to those in 
Nollekcns's work-see, for instance, the bust of sir George 
Savilc of 1784 in the Victoria and Albcrt Museum or the 
celcbratcd first bust of Charles James Fox at Holkham Hall, 
Norfolk; the cutting of iris and pupil is exactly in his manner; 
the detail of the lion badge on the chest is suggestive of his 
taste in ornaments; and the compact and rounded outline of 
the bust is typical of him. The bust of Cromwell which is 
listed by J. T. Smith in No//cfec„f ¢»¢ H¢.f T¢.7„cf (I.ondon, 
1828) has not, it seems, been traced. I believe that it is this 
bust to which the name of Picrcc was added in the mid-ninetccnth 
century to increase its value as an authentic likeness. 
An unsigned terracotta version of this bust was acquired in 
1861 for the National Portrait Gallery (no. 438, kept in storc-
D. P.rper. Catalogt4e Of Seventeenth-Centttry Portraits in the 
National Portrait Gallery 1625-1714 (Carrtondge. \963), 
96). The chest is squared off to form a herm and considerably 
reduced in size (the height is 41.9 cms.). The head looks too 
large and this treatment does not suit the armour. It is clearly 
not the origival design. The detail is not crisp and inspection 
of the rear of the bust reveals that it is cast, presumably from 
moulds taken from Nollekens's original model which had 
perhaps been modified (because of damage?) to this shape. 
In any case this is not a seventeenth-century work, since the 
Greek termination for a portrait bust was then unknown and, 
since it is cast, it is not the model for the marble bust as has 
been claimed. Mrs Poolc was right to observe the significance 
of the terracotta having belonged to the sculptor J. I.oft who 
was intercstcd in imaginary historical portraiture (ibid. 39 n.) 
and Piper was right to suspect that it was `ninetcenth-century 
work,. 
A bust of Cromwell simhar to that in the Ashmolcan was 
sold at Phillip's, I.ondon (3 July 1990, lot 229). The only 
major differcncc is that this version has a cloak covering much 
of the armour and fastened at the proper left shoulder, making 
a happier composition. `ULIVIERO CROMWEL[.' is chisclled on 
the tablet, which suggests an Italian origin. Another version 
of this type, with minor differences in the drapery, was sold 
on 6 July 1986 at Christie's, I.ondon, as lot 73-`F. Harwood 
Fecit 1759' was chisellcd on the socle. Patricia Wengraf, who 
bought the version sold at Phillip's, accepts Harwood as the 
inventor of this bust. Harwood had a flourishing practice in 
Florence during the 1750s and 1760s and, Mrs Wcngraf 
points out, he could have studied the plaster death mask of 
Cromwell now in the Bargcllo in Florence as well as Thomas 
Simon's Dunbar Medal of 1651 and, of course, prints. I have, 
however, seen no evidence that Harwood had the talent to 
invent a bust of this character and none of his oriSnal work-
BRITISH SCULI'TURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
the tomb of william, 2nd Earl Cowpcr, at Hertingfordbury 
completed in 1770, for example-is close in style. Most of 
his work as a sculptor seems to have been copying the work 
of others. That he was able to copy an invention by Nollekens 
is easy to believe especially if the orialnal model was made by 
Nollckens when he was in Rome between 1762 and 1770. 
That this was indeed the case is suggested by the very similar 
treatment of Cromwell's armour to that worn by the duke of 
York in the bust modeucd by Nollekens in Rome in 1764. It 
is also suggested by the treatment of the features, especially 
the frown, which recalls the bust of Piranesi in the Accadcmia 
di San Luca in Rome, which is the finest of all early portraits 
by Nollekcns (both rcproduccd in J. Kenworthy-Browne, 
`Establishing a Reputation: Joseph Nollekens: The Years in 
Rome-I', Co%#try L¢rc (7 )une 1979),1844-8). It would 
not have been extraordinary for Harwood to place his own 
name on Noll€kens's invention-nor to add a date which 
seemed to make Nollekens's invention impossible. The stylistic 
evidence in favour of Nollckens's authorship seems to me to 
be too strong to bc shaken by the undoubted connection 
with Harwood. 
143
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Edward PIERCE ( c.1630-95 ) 
559. Sir Christopher Wren 
66. I cms. (height, including socle); 9 cms. (height of soc[e); 
17 cms. (diameter of socle); 126.8 cms. (total height of pedestal 
as constituted at present); 83 cms. (height of principal baluster 
component of the pedestal) 
Carrara marble. There is a small chip missing from the shirt front to 
proper right and one curl on the same side has been broken off. 
The marble is streaked with grey which is particularly evident on the 
bare chest. The turned socle is made from a separate piece of marble. 
This socle had been cracked and a small portion detached and 
inadequately glued-this was replaced with polyester stone cement 
in June 1969 by Kathleen Kimber and C. P. Bartram of the 
Department of Antiquities. They removed the dirty and waxy surface 
of the marble with methane chloride, an acetone swab, and a `pack' 
of scpolite (magnesium silicate) and washed it with dcionized water. 
Given to the University by the son of the sitter, Mr. Christopher 
Wren, in 1737. Displayed during the eighteenth century in the 
Picture Gallery, and, by the end of the nineteenth century, in the 
Tower Room, of the Bodleian Library. Transferred, by Decree of 
Convocation in 1916, to the Ashmolean Museum, at the instigation 
of C. F. Bell-gainst `considerable opposition'-nd displayed in 
the Founder's Room, then known as the Eldon Room, against the 
Gobclins tapestry of the combat of animals and in the company of 
French and Italian seventeenth- and eighteenth-century paintings. 
It was still placed there in 1931. For many years it was displayed in 
the Tapestry Gallery. It was removed in 1987 to the Weldon Gallery. 
The pedestal, apparently given it by Bell, consisted of a bulbous 
baluster support ( boldly gadrooned in its lower part and carved with 
acanthus in its stem such as one might expect for a sundial of the 
late seventeenth century), raised on a block of marble and with two 
additional blocks on top the uppermost of which, a cube of po#o 
pccecrc (black marble with liquid yellow veins), was removed when 
the bust was placed in the Weldon Gallery. 
The bust of the most popular of British architects is the most 
celebrated achievement of Pierce and one of the most loved 
of all British sculptures-`onc of those rare treasures, a great 
work of art which is also the portrait of a very great man' 
(R L. Poolc, `Edward Pierce the Sculptor', W¢/Po/G Soc¢.Gay, 
11 ( 1923), 40); `probably the best piece of sculpture made 
by an Englishman in the Century' (M. Whinney and 0. Millar, 
E„g/¢.£4 A7? 1625-1714 (Oxford, 1957), 255). 
The attribution to Pierce is made in a letter by the donor 
written in 1742 which was quoted by Vcrtue in his notebooks: 
`thc bust was the performance of Edward Pierce about the 
year 1673' (`Notebooks', v, W¢/Po/c Soc¢.cty, 26 ( 1938), 9). 
The drama of such a broad triangular composition upon a 
small turned socle and of voluminous drapery, hastily pulled 
across the chest, with loose shirt, and disordered locks each 
played off against the other, represent responses to Bernini's 
portrait bust of Franccsco I d'Este (completed in 1651) and 
its numerous imitators, responses sinilar to those of the 
French sculptor Antoine Coysevox. 
Coysevox's faces are frequently given the alert conviviality 
we see here and a comparison with his work is made by 
Whinney in her discussion of this portrait (op. cit.) but taken 
no further. And yet when the bust is examined in relation to 
144 
Coysevox's bust of Charles Lebrun (the marble in the I.ouvre 
is dated 1679 but the terracotta in the Wallace Collection 
may be the model submitted to the Academy in 1676) it is 
surely only habit, supported by patriotism, that restrains 
scholars from wondering whether the Ashmolean's marble is 
not in fact a copy by Pierce of a lost bust, perhaps in fraSle 
terracotta, by Coysevox. The marble certainly looks like a 
copy: the boldness of the conception is simply not matched 
by an equivalent verve in the execution. And it is surely 
extraordinary that Pierce, had he invented a bust of this 
sophistication and vitality, should never have achieved 
anything comparable in his other bust portraits. His bust of 
Thomas Evans which he made in 1688 for the Painter-Stainers 
Company (Poole, op. cit., pl. XXIIIa) has similar ambitions, 
but it has nothing of this sweep in its drapery, whilst the 
empty arms give a feebleness to the whole treatment of the 
chest, and the curls of the wig are fat and coarse. If there was 
a model by Coysevox (or another French sculptor) which 
Pierce was copying, then there remains a problem of when 
and where it was made, for 1665, when we know Wren to 
have been in Paris, is too early a date, and although it is 
perfectly possible that Wren travelled to Paris again in the 
early 1670s, no such visit is recorded. An interesting later 
example of a distinguished Englishman obtaining a terracotta 
portrait by Coysevox in Paris is that of the diplomat and poet 
Matthew Prior (it was subsequently incorporated into his 
monument in Westminster Abbey). 
Tr-
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
I:,,,,,,`::;:::..,.:`.:-::,-,;:-::::;;i:: 
145
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
After a work attributed to Edward PIERCE ( c.1630-95) 
560. Portrait head probably of John 
rmton 
29.3 cms. (height) 
Plaster of I'aris coloured to resemble greyish yellow clay. Solid cast. 
Subscribed for by C. F. Bell in 1925 in his official capacity as Keeper 
of the Department of Fine Art and acquired in 1926 (A»7?#¢/ 
Report`24). 
The cast is an accurate reproduction, including cracks and 
loose fillings, of the portrait, generally accepted as of Milton, 
in unbaked clay which was bequeathed to Christ's Couege, 
Cambridge, by the Revd John Disney in 1816, having passed 
through the collections of Thomas Brand Hohis, Sir Joshua 
Reynolds, and George Vcrtue. (For a full account of this see 
I .W . Goodison. Catalogtte Of the Portraits in Christ's, Clare 
¢"d Sz.¢„ey S#jrex Co//egcf ( Cambridge, 1985), 26-7, no. 54. ) 
Vertue believed the clay head to be by Pierce, but Hollis 
recorded his `imprcssion' that it was `modelled by Abraham 
Simon' (jn4lc7„o¢.7tf (I.ondon,1780), ii. 513)-Simon was a 
noted medallist and wax modeller but no comparable-sized 
portrait by him seems to have survived. A marble copy of the 
clay head was made by Horace Montford in 1903 (Goodison, 
op. cit. 27, no. 56). In 1925 a cast of the clay head was made 
for the National Portrait Gallery (no. 2102), and six additional 
casts were subscribed for by the Master of Christ's College 
(Sir Arthur Shipley who bequcathcd it to his college in 1927), 
C. F. Bell, Sir Edmund Gosse, the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, the Scottish National Portrait Gallery (2102), and 
the National Gallery of victoria, Melbourne, Australia (ibid. 
27, no. 55. n. f). Bell had purchased what he believed to be 
Pierce's bust portrait of Cromwell in 1920 (No. 558) and 
had organized the transfer of the portrait of wren from the 
Bodleian in 1916 (No. 559). 
-th_ 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Frederick Wman POMEROY ( 1856-1924) 
After Niccol6 Tribolo ( 1500-50) 
561. Piping satyr astride a vase 
28.1 cms. (height, including integral base); 1.15 cms. (height of 
integral base) 
Bronze with a dull dark brown patina worn to a pale tan on some 
salient curls and the shoulder blades. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. `Cast 
by F. W. Pomeroy from the oriSnal in the Bargell-for Mr 
Fortnum' is painted in white in the hollow interior of the base. 
Possibly part of the bequest of c. D. E. Fortnum (see description 
above) although unmentioned in his catalogues. More probably the 
`bronze figure of a satyr. Italian, sixteenth century' recorded with 
no provenance in the Donations Book under 1933 which cannot 
be identified with any other bronze now in the Ashmolean. 
The bronze satyr is a copy by Pomcroy of one in the Bargcllo, 
Florence (inventory number 390; no. 30 in the MS catalogue 
of 1879; previously Uffizi 2551-63) which had been suggested 
as a work by Michelangelo in the late nineteenth century. 
century. Since then it has been attributed to Pietro Tacca, 
Danese Cattaneo, and Tiziano Minio and, more vaguely, it 
has been regarded as `Paduan'. However, J. Holderbauni 
(`Notes on Tribol-I', 8%„/G.#:g}o# jl4:¢g#2;¢.#G (Oct. 1957), 
340) pointed out the strong probabhity that it was the bronze 
docuinented as being cast for the grand duke of Tuscany by 
Zanobi I'ortiSani (de' Pagni) on 18 April 1549 from a model 
of `uno satiro' made by Tribolo. Pomeroy's copy is very 
accurate but the base is slightly less high and one of the horns 
has lost its cnd. Also of course in the original the erect penis 
is not concealed by a branch. 
Pomeroy was first apprenticcd to a firm of architectural 
carvers and studied at the Lambcth School of Art. Hc was 
then admitted to the Royal Academy Schools in December of 
1880. In the summer of 1885 he won the gold medal and 
travehing studentship which enabled him to study in Paris 
(under Merci€) and then in Italy. There seems to be no 
record of him returning to Italy, so if he copied the origival 
in Florence his model would date from this visit ( c.1886). In 
any case, the cast would have to have been made before 
Fortnum's death in 1899. The popularity of the small bronze 
statuette, the revival of lost-wax casting, and the fascination 
with nymphs, fauns, and satyrs so conspicuous in English 
sculpture in the last years of the nineteenth century are not 
easily connected with the tastes of scholarly collectors of 
Renaissance art such as Fortnum-xcept inasmuch as 
Fortnum was involved in the formation of the collection of 
the Victoria and Albcrt Museum. But that at least one direct 
link existed is suggested by the inscription on this bronze. 
What the inscription does not make clear is whether the idea 
of making such a copy cane from Fortnun. Even if it did, 
his was not the only cast that Pomcroy made. 
T`+.€. Pescrjp_i_i_p_: Catalogue of a Small Collection Principally 
a/XV£¢ ¢»d XVI£¢ Cc#f%ry 87o„zcf printed privately 
(apparently in an edition of 20 copics! ) in 1900 records the 
Collection of Henry Pfungst when it was sold to the dealers 
Durlacher and vycrtheimer who then sold it, in the surrmer 
147
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
of 1901, to J. Picrpont Morgan. No. 15 on page 3 is `Figure. 
11 inches. I'an playing on the pipes, seated on an urn-shaped 
vase. Reproduction in the c¢.7c PG7i¢# process by F. W. 
Pomeroy, with a slight alteration from the origival in the 
Bargello, Florence, said to be the work of Michael Angelo.' 
It is interesting that Pfungst was a collector who was closely 
in touch with Fortnum (see No. 233 for transactions between 
them and Nos. 201 and 203 for other items from Pfungst's 
collection). Pfungst's version was not recorded in Bode's 
catalogue of Morgan's collection of bronzes (which confined 
itself to older items) but passed to the Brummer and Chester 
Tripp Collections and has recently been bequeathed to the 
Art Institute, Chicago. It differs from the Ashmolean cast 
only in that the base is not open and in that it carries two 
marks both incised in the wax model: on the base behind the 
vase there is a P and below the base a monogram consisting 
of a P with two Fs interlacing and a small 2 after it. 
Both the Ashmolean and Chicago casts declare themselves 
to be modern reproductions by the c¢c¢e-fc:A;c, but another 
cast without this and without any evident marks was sold by 
a descendant of Pomeroy's at Phillips, I.ondon, on 30 June 
1987 (lot 74). Various other casts without the c¢c¢G-fc#e arc 
recorded. One at Sotheby's, I.ondon, on 4 November 1988, 
lot 86, certainly looked like Pomeroy's work. Those for sale 
at the Chatcau de Laame, Brussels, C¢£Ofog#c dc /'erpof¢.£¢.o7¢ 
de bronaes de la Renaissance (Se;pt.-Oct. +967)> no. 25 (ex 
cat. as by Tribolo) and as lot 295, Christie's, New York, 20 
November 1982 (as after Tribolo)-both drawn to my 
attention by Ian Wardroppcr-I have not seen. It is tempting 
to associate these latter two versions (conceivably the same 
version) with Pomcroy, but one other example in a public 
collection, that in the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore (54.626, 
purchased from Jacques Scligmann in Paris in the carly 
decades of the century), looks like an aftercast which has been 
tooled, unlike the casts by Pomeroy, and is also of a different 
colour, which suggests that someone else may have been 
reproducing Tribolo's vigorous and lewd little S¢tyy. In this 
connection it is significant that a terracotta cast of the `Piccolo 
Satira da originale in bronzo di Pietro Tacca', 27 cms. in 
height, is listed (as no. 535, XLII) in the catalogue of the 
`Manifattura di Signa: Terre Cotte artistichc e decorative' 
which had premises in Florence (Via dc' Vecchietti 2), Rome 
(Via del Babuino 50), Turin (Via Accademia Albertina 5), 
and Paris (rue Chaussee d'Antin 12) dating from about 1910. 
148 
;:;..,;T,;,..\,.,,,,"ys,,.::,,giv::is!Hifegiv,:]i 
- 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Frederick William POMEROY ( 1856-1924) 
562. Perseus with the head of 
Medusa 
50 cms. (height including integral plinth); 3 cms. (height of 
plinth); 11.35 cms. (length of plinth); 9.45 cms. (width of plinth) 
Copper with a warm pale tan patina. Electrodeposit. The interior of 
the integral plinth reveals the bubbled texture characteristic of this 
process. `F. W. POMERoy. / Sc 1898.' is inscribed on the proper left 
side of the base; `N° 6C' betvireen the hero's feet. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R. Brocklebank in November 1926. 
No.13 in Andrew Shirley's receipt of January 1927 as `A Statuette, 
St. George, holding head and sword'. 
Pomcroy exhibited `Perseus; as a symbol of the subduing and 
resisting of Evil, Statuc' at the Royal Academy exhibition in 
1898 (no.1964). This has been asstimed to be the life-size 
bronze in the National Museum of wales, Cardiff, but a 
letter in the Department's archive from Pomeroy's widow, 
Patricia Payne, dated 27 March 1928, confirms that it was a 
plaster cast that was exhibited. The small bronze versions are 
common at London auctions and arc found in several public 
collections: the Victoria and Albert Museum; the Laing Art 
Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne; the Stirling Maxweu 
Collection, Pollok House, Glasgow. They are by no means 
all of the same quality. The Victoria and Albert's version is a 
lost-wax cast with a lively surface; others such as the 
Ashmolean's have the dead uniformity of the electrodeposit. 
They also differ in several respects from the life-sized work: 
most notably, the hero's lips are parted and his eyelids raised. 
But there is also some variety in details between the reduced 
versions. 
The Ashmolean's is unusual in not having `Perseus' in 
Greek characters on the front face of the plinth. There are 
also differences in the design of the snakes suspended from 
the head of Medusa. In the version at Christie's, Ijondon, 29 
September 1989 (lot 257), they were knotted, in the version 
at Phillips, Ijondon, 30 June 1987 (lot 75), they curled to 
proper right, and so on. The number on the Ashmolean's 
version is unusual although a version at Sotheby's, Ijondon, 
23 June 1987 (lot 81), was nulnbered `N° 6C['. However, all 
versions that I have seen have been dated 1898 and this may 
well be the date of the model, which is likely to be preliminary 
to the creation of the hfe-sized work. The date at which the 
bronzcs were made is not certain, but one was exhibited in 
1902 at the Fine Art Society's `Sculpture for the Home' 
exhibition. The casts were then sehing for 30 guineas each. 
(S. Beattie, 7%G Niow7 Sc#/Pf"re (New Haven, Conn., and 
London,1983),199, citing an annotated copy of the 
catalogue.) Many of the small casts retain oriSnal pedestals 
which are almost always of pG#de d¢. P"¢}o (Tuscan serpentine). 
Beattie justly observes of the PGrJc#f that it recalls the 
famous D¢p¢.¢ exhibited at the Salon in Paris in 1872 by 
Mercie, with whom Pomeroy had studied in 1885 after he 
won the Royal Academy travelling scholarship. The D¢p¢.d 
was extensively available as a bronze of a similar size to the 
small bronze Perseus. Pomcroy's figure also recalls the heroic 
male nudes of Gilbert (Nos. 497-8, 505) and of course the 
bronzes of the Renaissance which had bccn an inspiration to 
both Merci€ and Gilbert. The accessories contrive to allude 
to the hero's other adventures: the hilt of his sword takes the 
form of Andromeda bound and at the mercy of the sea 
monster which is wound around the guard; the winged horse, 
Pegasus, forms the crest of his helmet. This latter creature 
seems to be modelled on a small Renaissance bronze of 
similarly sketchy character an example of which, in Fortnun's 
collection (8. 438), Pomeroy, who worked for Fortnuni (see 
No. 561), may well have studied. There are other instances in 
Pomeroy's bronzes of his close acquaintance with Renaissance 
bronzes. He even initiated for his small bronze of the young 
B¢cc¢#J (possibly exhibited 1890 but most casts are dated 
1903) a type of triangular base with hoof feet employed by 
Severo da Ravenna. 
149
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Jancs PRYDE ( 1866-1941 ) 
563. John Willet 
38 cms. (height including integral plinth); 8 cms. (height of 
integral plinth); 14.9 cms. (length of integral plinth); 10.8 cms. 
(width of integral plinth) 
Wood, probably Honduras mahogany, carved and painted. The 
plinth is integral: a slight vertical opening in both sides of it and in 
the stump support reveals a join. The figure has probably been 
carved from three blocks joined vertically; hints of the join of the 
third smaller piece may be found in the belly and beer jug. There 
are small chips to the plinth at proper lower left front comer and 
lower right back comer. The colours of the paint (shades of brown 
and khaki grey) other than black may have darkened but are always 
likely to have been smoky. The colour of the mahogany shines 
through the black paint in a few worn areas. The name `John Willet' 
painted in black on the front face of the plinth is slightly worn in 
the last letters. 
Purchased for £5,500 from the exhibition of Pryde's work at the 
Redfem Gallery, 20 Cork St (22 Sept.-26 0ct. 1988), where it was 
no. 21 (illustrated in the catalogue). Purchase finalized on 9 
December 1988 using the Bouch Bequest Fund (£1,500), the 
France Fund (£1,000), and the Mary Freeman Bequest Fund 
(£3,000). The sculpture was sold through the Redfern Gallery by 
Peyton Skipwith of the Fine All Society. Mr Skipwith bought it 
from Marguerite Steen. She inherited it from the artist's friend, 
brother-in-law, and collaborator Sir William Nicholson. Previous to 
this it belonged to Barney Scale. 
Derek Hudson in /¢owGf Prydc (I.ondon, 1949), 58 and 98, 
discusses this statuette and illustrates it or a version of it 
(pl. XIII). `A friend remembers him [Prydc] sitting in a swivel 
chair, working on some little figure, but ready to swing round 
to his easel at the first sign of his wife's approach! His statuette 
of O/d/oA# W¢.//cf, the landlord of the "Maypole" in B¢ow¢ky 
R„dz7G, is typical of the large Rabelaisian. quality and strong 
virile understanding that gave us /o„oc¢f. ' Hudson records 
the statue as of plaster and there may have been another 
version, perhaps a cast of this one, in that medium, but this 
statucttc is not at first sight obviously of wood. The sculpture 
is undatcd but the rhythmic stylization of the bulgivg 
rotundities is very suggestive of the imagery which Pryde and 
Nicholson invented together in their woodcuts of the mid-
1890s where the traditional British tradesman and servant 
class often have a menacing appearance-although the 
grotesque buufrog proportions and protruding eyes of this 
figure are more grotesque than anything there. They are also 
unlike anything else in British art and were perhaps suggested 
by Daumier. It reminds us of Prydc's fascination with the 
stage and with the eighteenth century of Hogarth, but also 
of his alcohohsm which must have endowed a supplier such 
as Wiuet with a nightmare status. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Charles dc Souay RICKETTS RA ( 1866-1931 ) 
With the workshop of c. and A. Giuliano 
564. Pendant medallion portrait of 
Ryllis Hacon in a framework of 
scrolls and leaves 
9.7 cms. (height, including suspension loop); 5.9 cms. (width); 
3.15 cms. (diameter of medallion) 
Gold with enamcls, pearls, precious, and semi-precious stones. The 
profile head is embossed on a circular medallion of thin gold. `C.R' 
is scratched beneath the bun and the neck. This medallion is backed 
by a thicker plate of gold with chanplev6 enamels of blue and green 
and is set in a framework consisting of gold scrolls with c/o¢.fo#7?c' 
white and blue enamels and of leaves with green enamel. The green 
and blue enamels are G» 4¢j:tc }#¢.//c (translucent to reveal the ribbed 
surface of the gold below). The leaves at the top form a mask, its 
eyes set with rubies or gamets and its mouth perforated with a larger 
ruby or garnet within it. Attached to the franc arc four irregular 
emeralds and two irregular rubies set in claws, and five pearls set in 
cups. In addition three baroque pearls are suspended from the 
frame, the larger, central one, below a sapphire. From the back it is 
clear that the two claws holding the rubies are of a warmer gold than 
the frame and have been soldered on to it: so these may represent 
a revision to the origival design. There is a reinforcement in the 
same warmer gold to the claw holding the emerald to proper left of 
the lower part of the fromc. 
Given by Mrs Robichaud (nee Hacon) of Overstys Cottage, 
Domoch, Scotland, in memory of w. IJewcllyn Hacon (her father). 
Registered on 20 June 1952. Placed on display with the late-nineteenth-
century British bronzcs in May 1989. 
Ryllis (for Amaryllis) was the name by which Edith Broadbent, 
a noted beauty and model, was known in artistic circles. She 
married Llewellyn Hacon, a wealthy lawyer who was the 
partner of Charles Rickctts and his ffiend Charles H. Shannon 
in the Vale Press-the chief venture in the lives of these two 
artists between 1896 and 1904. She had previously been a 
favourite model of Shannon's. The pendant is said to date 
from 1900 and was perhaps presented by the artist to the 
sitter. RIcketts seems to have begun making designs for 
jewcllcry in 1899. Certainly the first of his designs which is 
documented as having actually been realized was a pendant, 
intended to be won by Icarus in one of his paintings, 
presented to his friend, the poet Katherine Bradley, in 1899. 
An album in the British Museum entitled by RIcketts 
`Dcsigns for Jewels done in RIchmond 1899' ( 198a.43) 
includes other designs incorporating similar scrolls and leaves 
and a mask in the frame ( 1962-8-9-2 ( 1 ), (2), (3) ). The 
preliminary drawing for this jewel is included in this album 
(ibid. (37) ). It differs in that the blue enamel in the scrolls is 
unbroken, the sapphire is a ruby, there is only one central 
baroque pearl, and no rubies are attached to the sides. 
Ricketts was not the first British painter in this period to 
have been keenly involved in the design of jcwcuery. It was, 
in particular, an intcrcst of Burne-Jones in his late years. There 
Charles Ricketts original design for the 
Hacon pendant (above) and 
preliminary sketch probably for the 
same (below). British Museum 
151
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
had also been many instances of special jewels being made in 
order to be included in paintings, especially those of an 
archacolodcal character (see C. Gerc and G. Munn, Arfz.fff' 
/c.n7c//cry (I.ondon,1989), for this phenomenon). RIcketts's 
involvcmcnt is of particular significance, because it was through 
jcwcllery, then attracting leading British sculptors such as 
Gilbert and Frampton, that he discovered his talents as a 
sculptor, to which indeed he turned in 1905 after hc ceased 
to design jcwcllcry. In the case of this pendant the embossed 
relief is entirely by RIcketts (said to have been executed with 
a penknife and lead pencil). The setting, as was usual with 
his jewels, was not made by him but was designed by him, 
carefully supervised by him, and probably revised (as is 
suggested by both comparison with the drawing and 
examination of the gold) to suit him. 
Next to the drawings for this jewel in the album in the 
British Museum is another, sketchier and uncoloured, in pen 
for a framed profile portrait (ibid. (38) ), which has something 
of the calligraphic freedom of Gilbert. It is likely to be an 
early idea for the Hacon jcwcl but in it the lines of the hair 
are taken up in the composition of the frame. It is also 
noteworthy that in the drawing the profile faces right, as is 
more usual. No doubt Mrs Hacon faces left because the 
embossing was carried out for the most part on the reverse 
of the medallion. The most ambitious of RIcketts's jewels-
`a pendant of pendants which will tear all lace and scratch 
babies'-was completed in March 1904 as a betrothal Sft 
for Maria Appia and Thomas Sturge-Moore (today in the 
Fitzwilliam Museum). In it the coloured stones and ornament 
are fully integrated with bolder rclicf sculpture-which 
rcprcscnts the Descent of Psyche into Hell-whereas in this 
cahier work frame and portrait were conceived of, and indeed 
created, separately. The leaf ornament at the top of the frame 
in the Ashmolcan's pendant, forming a grotesque mask of 
green enamel with stones set in the eyes and open mouth, 
was to be repcatcd more boldly in the Descent of Psyche 
pendant, but there it has a symbolic meaning, suggesting 
Psyche's teinfying destination, whereas it has no such 
relationship with Mrs Hacon (one hopes). 
All of RIcketts's jewellery was executed by, or rather with, 
`Giuliani frores', that is the workshop of Arthur Alphonse 
Giuliano ( c.1864-1914). Arthur was the son of carlo Giuliano 
(c.183l-95), a Neapolitan by birth, who came to London in 
about 1860, probably with the great Italian jewcllcr, 
goldsmith, antiquarian, dealer, and collector Alessandro 
Castellani who had bccn based in Paris, but is known to have 
wanted to open premises in I.ondon in the early 1860s. 
Giuliano, who had certainly been an associate and probably 
an employee of Castcllani, may have been proposed as the 
I.ondon manager but he set up independently with a 
workshop in Frith Street and in 1874 opened his own shop 
at 115 Piccadilly. The business was inherited by his sons Carlo 
Joseph and Arthur Alphonse, but the former seems not to 
have bccn active in it. Both Carlo and his son Arthur were 
accomplished `rcvivalist' jewcllers imitating, and on occasion 
replicating, Egyptian, Etruscan, Greek, Gothic, Renaissance, 
and lndial\ wock. (G. C. Mann. Castellani and Gittliani 
(Fribourg, 1984), 47-75, cspccially 47-55 for an introduction 
152 
to the Giuliani, 68-9 for the work of Ricketts, pls. 29-30, 
and captions on page 35 for this pendant.) 
For Ricketts and the Hacons see J. C. P. Delaney, Cho7i/cJ 
R£.c4c#r (Oxford,1991), 95 and 140. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
I.ouis-Fran¢ois ROUBILIAC ( 1702 or 1705nd2) 
565. Modello for the monument to 
George Frideric Handel in 
Westminster Abbey 
98 cms. (height) 
Terracotta and plaster of Paris. The background is of terracotta 
above the dado mouldings at the height of the figure's waist. There 
arc several breaks in it all of which have been repalrcd. It is attached 
by plaster to a slab of slate to which the lower portion of the 
background, which is of wood and plaster, is also fixed. The plaster 
has been coloured to match the terracotta. The figure with papers, 
table, draperies, and horn arc of terracotta, hollowed out to some 
extent behind. There are also several holes in the rear, one of which 
pierces the model entirely bctwecn the figure's legs. The figure 
appears to have been given a plaster base, coloured to match the 
clay, but it is possible that this base is of terracotta extensively 
reinforced with plaster. There are several obvious repair lines: on 
the horn, and at the top of the shcct music, for example. One corner 
of the sheet music has been made up with plaster as has a large 
portion of the first fold of the coat to proper right. After examination 
by X-ray and binocular microscope at the Victoria and Albert 
Museum in 1984 a report was submitted to the Keeper (in the form 
of a letter from Malcolm Baker dated 23 October) suggesting that 
the surface was at one time covered in white paint. The report also 
pointed out that the composer's right arin was modelled separately 
and inserted into the sleeve. This is in fact evident without artificial 
aids, for the arm is modelled entirely in the round and yet placed 
only a hair's breadth from the body. Examination with the naked 
eye also reveals that the lower part of the composer's left leg was 
separately modelled. The portion of the cloak which has been made 
up with plaster was loosened during the examination of the work 
in October 1984 and subsequently reattached. 
Given by James Wyatt in 1848 to the University Gallery (Donations 
Book, p.11). Mr. Wyatt was an alt dealer, print publisher, franc 
maker, and picture restorer in Oxford's High Street whose firm had 
many close associations with the University Galleries in its early 
years. Scc also No. 542. The %ode//a seems to have been placed on 
a pedestal veneered with yGzde ¢#Jfro (green and grey-green breccia). 
In more recent years it has been supported on a pedestal of wood 
covcrcd with the blue brocade of the walls of the Chambers Hall 
Gallery in which it is placed. The H¢»dfroo4 G#¢.def reveal that it 
was in the Fortnum Room in 1909 and the RIffaello Room in 
1931, and photographs show it in the Hill Music Room in the 
1950s. The pcrfe a"f¢.co would have matched the Music Room 
skirting. 
Roubhiac's famous monument to Handel in Westminster 
Abbey was commissioned with the ftoo which the composer 
left for this purpose in his win. A fee was paid to the Abbey 
in 1759, the year of the composer's death, and the monument 
was unveiled on 10 July 1762 according to the GGce*/G%¢%'J 
A4¢gr¢zG.#c, 32: 340. The Ashmolean model differs in few 
details fi.om the marble. In the latter the composcr's irises arc 
unmarked and, since his index finger has been broken off, 
We cannot be certain that it pointed to heaven. Also in the 
marble the lower sheet is chiselled with the word `MESSIAH' 
and the higher with `Larghctto / I know that my Redeemer 
liveth / and that Hc shall stand / . . . at the last . . .' 
There is a smaller terracotta model (35.7 cms. in height) 
said to have been found in recent years in a Bristol antique 
shop and subsequently sold to `the Gerald Coke Handel 
Collcction' (reproduced in colour in the catalogue of the 
=r±Ibiti?n R?c?:.o: Art and Desizgn in Hogarth'-s England 
(Victoria and Albert Museum, 16 May-30 Sept. 1984), 
pl. XXVI). In this smancr version the angel is placed nearer 
to the composer, the feet seeming to touch his head which 
is here covered with a nightcap; the composer does not look 
up as if rapt by t:he angelic harping, but vacantly out to his 
left; he has his right hand on the further edge of his score and 
his left also on it at the top left-hand corner. Some passages 
of modelling-most notably the draperies and legs of the 
harpisrrirc lively but perfunctory, the hands, being 
summary, look feeble, and the unbroken ffll of the composcr's 
cloak is heavy and dull. The handling, however, with its dabs 
and pokes, is quite close to that of the model for the 
monument to John, 2nd duke of Montagu (Victoria and 
Albert Museum, A.6-1947). 
The working of the clay in the Ashmolean model is unusual 
for its careful finish and most unusual on account of the 
modelling and the texture of the composcr's hands and face 
which make them more refined and more vital than anything 
in any surviving small terracotta by the sculptor. The texture 
is achieved by hatching with a fine tool in the clay when it 
was leather-hard. This is also found in the high-relief bust 
portrait of Oliver Cromwcn in the Royal Ontario Muscun, 
Toronto (959.492), but not, for example, in the face of 
Handel in the model for his statue in Vaurhall Gardens 
(Fitzwilliam Museum, M3-1922). It is more typical of 
Rysbrack's work on this scale (the face of Ncvlon in the 
model for his monument is a striking example-Victoria and 
Albert Museum, A.1-1938). The handling of the raised hand 
especially may be compared with that in some sculpture by 
Jean-Baptiste I,emoyne, such as the terracotta bust of 
Fontenellc in the Mus6c des Beaux-Arts, Lyon ( 1974-4). 
There were four `dcsigns' for `Mr. Handen' in lot 70 on 
the second day of Roubiliac's studio sale at hagford's, 
Ijondon, 13 May 1762, and these might weu have been 
terracotta sketches and have included this piece. 
Although catalogued in the Rococo exhibition (cited above, 
no. S 46, p. 307) as `attributed to Roubiliac', the compiler 
has since informed me that he has no doubts concerning its 
status. Its tcchniquc is certainly peculiar: but the combination 
of plaster and terracotta, whilst in pa]t due to restoration, is 
certainly also in part origival and is characteristic of Roubihac, 
as may be seen, for instance, from the way a plaster soclc is 
attached to his terracotta bust of Hogarth in the National 
Portrait Gallery. 
A sample was taken from the terracotta by Mrs Doreen 
Stonehan of the Oxford Research Laboratory for 
Archaeology and the History of Art in March 1987 and 
thermo-lumincsccncc tests suggested a date between 1767 
and 1847 (ref. 48l-a-30). If this result is trusted then the 
possibility of the model being made after the marble was 
complctcd should be considered. 
153
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
had also been many instances of special jewels being made in 
order to be included in paintings, especially those of an 
archaeolodcal character (see C. Gere and G. Munn, Arfz.fff' 
JowG//ey (Ijondon, 1989), for this phenomenon). Rickctts's 
involvementisofparticularsignificance,becauseitwasthrough 
jewellery, then attracting leading British sculptors such as 
Gilbert and Frampton, that he discovered his talents as a 
sculptor, to which indeed he tuned in 1905 after he ceased 
to design jewellery. In the case of this pendant the embossed 
relief is entirely by RIcketts (said to have been executed with 
a penknife and lead pencil). The setting, as was usual with 
his jewels, was not made by him but was designed by him, 
carefuuy supervised by him, and probably revised (as is 
suggested by both comparison with the drawing and 
examination of the gold) to suit him. 
Next to the drawings for this jewel in the album in the 
British Museuni is another, sketchier and uncolourcd, in pen 
for a framed profile portrait (ibid. (38) ), which has something 
of the calligraphic freedom of Gilbert. It is likely to be an 
early idea for the Hacon jewel but in it the lines of the hair 
are taken up in the composition of the frame. It is also 
noteworthy that in the drawing the profile faces right, as is 
more usual. No doubt Mrs Hacon faces left because the 
embossing was carried out for the most part on the reverse 
of the medallion. The most ambitious of Rickctts's jewels-
`a pendant of pendants which win tear all lace and scratch 
babies'-was completed in March 1904 as a betrothal aft 
for Maria Appia and Thomas Sturgc-Moorc (today in the 
Fitzwilliam Museum). In it the coloured stones and ornament 
are fully intcgratcd with bolder rehef sculpture-which 
represents the Descent of Psyche into Hell-whereas in this 
earlier work frame and portrait wcrc conceived of, and indeed 
created, separately. The leaf ornament at the top of the frame 
in the Ashmolean's pendant, forming a grotesque mask of 
green enamel with stones set in the eyes and open mouth, 
was to be repeated more boldly in the Descent of Psyche 
pendant, but there it has a symbolic meaning, suggesting 
Psyche's terrifying destination, whereas it has no such 
relationship with Mrs Hacon (one hopes). 
AIl of Rickctts's jewellery was executed by, or rather with, 
`Giuliani frercs', that is the workshop of Arthur Alphonse 
Giuliano(c.1864-1914).ArthurwasthesonofcarloGiuliano 
(c.183l-95), a Neapolitan by birth, who came to ljondon in 
about 1860, probably with the great Italian jcwellcr, 
goldsmith, antiquarian, dcalcr, and couector Alessandro 
Castellani who had been based in Paris, but is known to have 
wanted to open premises in London in the early 1860s. 
Giuliano, who had certainly been an associate and probably 
an cmployce of Casteuani, may have been proposed as the 
I.ondon manager but hc set up independently with a 
workshop in Frith Street and in 1874 opened his own shop 
at 115 Piccadilly. The business was inherited by his sons Carlo 
Joseph and Arthur Alphonse, but the former seems not to 
have been active in it. Both Carlo and his son Arthur were 
accomplished `revivalist' jewellers imitating, and on occasion 
rephcating, Egyptian, Etruscan, Greek, Gothic, RenaissaTce, 
and Indian work. (G. C. Munn, C¢f££//¢„G. ¢„¢ G¢.#/¢.¢»¢ 
( Fribourg,1984), 47-75, especially 47-5 5 for an introduction 
152 
I 
to the Giuliani, 68-9 for the work of RIckctts, pls. 29-30, 
and captions on page 35 for this pendant.) 
For RIckctts and the Hacons see I. C. P. Delaney, C¢¢#JGJ 
A;cfec#f (Oxford,1991), 95 and 140. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Ijouis-Fran¢ois ROUBILIAC ( 1702 or 1705nd2) 
565. Modello for the monument to 
George Frideric Handel in 
Wesrfuster Abbey 
98 cms. (height) 
Terracotta and plaster of Paris. The background is of terracotta 
above the dado mouldings at the height of the figure's waist. There 
arc several breaks in it all of which have been repaired. It is attached 
by plaster to a slab of slate to which the lower portion of the 
background, which is of wood and plaster, is also fixed. The plaster 
has been coloured to match the terracotta. The figure with papers, 
table, draperies, and horn are of terracotta, hollowed out to some 
extent behind. There are also several holes in the rear, one of which 
pierces the model entirely between the figure's legs. The figure 
appears to have been given a plaster base, coloured to match the 
clay, but it is possible that this base is of terracotta extensively 
reinforced with plaster. There are several obvious repair lines: on 
the horn, and at the top of the sheet music, for example. One corner 
of the sheet music has been made up with plaster as has a large 
pordon of the first fold of the coat to proper right. After examination 
by X-ray and binocular microscope at the Victoria and Albert 
Museum in 1984 a report was submitted to the Keeper (in the form 
of a letter from Malcolm Baker dated 23 October) suggesting that 
the surface was at one time covered in white paint. The report also 
pointed out that the compo§er's right arm was modelled separately 
a.nd inscrtcd into the sleeve. This is in fact evident without artificial 
aids, for the arm is modelled entirely in the round and yet placed 
only a halr's breadth from the body. Examination with the naked 
eye also reveals that the lower part of the composer's left leg was 
separately modelled. The portion of the cloak which has been made 
up with plaster was loosened during the examination of the work 
in October 1984 and subsequently reattached. 
Given by James Wyatt in 1848 to the University Gallery (Donations 
Book, p.11). Mr. Wyatt was an art dealer, print publisher, fromc 
maker, and picture restorer in Oxford's High Street whose firm had 
many close associations with the University Galleries in its early 
years. See also No. 542. The owode//a sccms to have been placed on 
a pedestal vcncered with pG#de ¢„f¢.co ( green and grey-green brcccia). 
In more recent years it has been supported on a pedestal of wood 
covered with the blue brocade of the walls of the Chambers Hall 
Gallery in which it is placed. The H¢„d4oofe G#¢.def rcvcal that it 
was in the Fortnum Room in 1909 and the Raffaello Room in 
1931, and photographs show it in the Hill Music Room in the 
1950s. The pe7rfe ¢"f¢.co would have matched the Music Room 
skirting. 
Roubiliac's famous monument to Handel in Wcstminstcr 
Abbey was commissioned with the £600 which the composer 
left for this purpose in his will. A fee was paid to the Abbey 
in 1759, the year of the composer's death, and the monument 
was unveiled on 10 July 1762 according to the GG"£/Gow¢7?'f 
A44[g¢zG.#G, 32: 340. The Ashmolean model differs in few 
details from the marble. In the latter the composer's irises are 
unmarkcd and, since his index finger has been broken off, 
wc cannot be certain that it pointed to heaven. Also in the 
marble the lower sheet is chiscued with the word `MESSIAH' 
and the higher with `Larghetto / I know that my Redeemer 
liveth / and that He sham stand / . . . at the last . . .' 
There is a smaller terracotta model (35.7 cms. in height) 
said to have been found in recent ycar§ in a Bristol antique 
shop and subsequently sold to `thc Gerald Coke Handel 
Collection' ( reproduced in colour in the catalogue of the 
c;xhilkjlfi urn Rococo: An and Design in Hogarth's England 
(Victoria and Albert Museum, 16 May-30 Sept. 1984), 
pl. XXVI). In this smaller version the angel is placed nearer 
to the composer, the feet seeming to touch his head which 
is here covered with a nightcap; the composer does not look 
up as if rapt by the angelic harping, but vacantly out to his 
left; he has his right hand on the further edge of his score and 
his left also on it at the top left-hand corner. Some passages 
of modelling-most notably the draperies and legs of the 
harpist-rc lively but perfunctory, the hands, being 
summary, look feeble, and the unbroken fall of the composer's 
cloak is heavy and dull. The handling, however, with its dabs 
and pokes, is quite close to that of the model for the 
monument to John, 2nd duke of Montagu (Vlctoria and 
Albcrt Museum, A.6-1947). 
The working of the clay in the Ashmolean model is unusual 
for its careful finish and most unusual on account of the 
modelling and the texture of the composcr's hands and face 
which make them more refined and more vital than anything 
in any surviving small terracotta by the sculptor. The texture 
is achicvcd by hatching with a fine tool in the clay when it 
was leather-hard. This is also found in the high-relief bust 
portrait of Ohvcr Cromweu in the Royal Ontario Museum, 
Toronto (959.492), but not, for example, in the face of 
Handel in the model for his statue in Vauxhan Gardens 
(Fitzwillian Museum, M3-1922). It is more typical of 
Rysbrack's work on this scale (the face of Newton in the 
model for his monument is a striking example-Victoria and 
Albert Museum, A.I-1938). The handling of the raised hand 
especially may be compared with that in some sculpture by 
Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne, such as the terracotta bust of 
Fontenene in the Mus6e des Beaux-Arts, Lyon ( 1974-4). 
There were four `designs' for `Mr. Handell' in lot 70 on 
the second day of Roubihac's studio sale at I.angford's, 
I.ondon, 13 May 1762, and these might well have bccn 
terracotta sketches and have included this piece. 
Although catalogued in the Rococo exhibition (cited above, 
no. S 46, p. 307) as `attributed to Roubiliac', the compiler 
has since informed me that he has no doubts concerning its 
status. Its technique is certainly peculiar: but the combination 
of plaster and terracotta, whilst in part due to restoration, is 
certainly also in part origival and is characteristic of Roubiliac, 
as may be seen, for instance, from the way a plaster socle is 
attached to his terracotta bust of Hogarth in the National 
Portrait Gallery. 
A sample was taken from the terracotta by Mrs Doreen 
Stoneham of the Oxford Research I.aboratory for 
Archaeology and the History of Art in March 1987 and 
thermo-luminescence tests suggcstcd a date between 1767 
and 1847 (ref. 48l-a-30). If this result is trusted then the 
possibility of the model being made after the marble was 
completed should bc considered. 
153
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
154 
John Michael RYSBRACK ( 1694-1770) 
566. Bust portrait of John 
Churchill, lst duke of Marlborough 
63.3 cms. (height of bust excluding pedestal); 59 cms. (width of 
bust); 28.8 cms. (height of pedestal); 35.5 cms. (length of 
pedestal); 25.6 cms. (width of pedestal); 116.4 cms. (height of 
sub-pedestal); 37.2 cms. (length of sub-pedestal); 25.6 cms. 
(width of sub-pedestal) 
White Carrara marble considerably discoloured. Small chips have 
been lost from one of the leaves in the hair and from the uppemost 
fold of drapery at the front of the chest. On the base of the bust at 
t:he rear are traces of black letters spelling: `|oHN DUKE 
oF/ MARLBORoUGH'. On the front of the pedestal a I.atin text is 
chiselled which is translated behind: `Princc of the Roman Empire 
8cc / The Rescuer of the hibcrtics of ENGIAND and 
HOLIAND / when in the most Imminent Danger. / The Subduer 
and Scourge / of FRANCE when in its / Height of Power. / The 
Deliverer and Protector / of GERMANy / when at the Point of 
Ruin. /Who through the whole course / Of a Ten Years Vigorous 
WAR, / In Repeated Attacks / Upon the Enemies Armies, and 
continual / Assaults Upon their Strong Towns, / Never once fulcd 
of success.' Below this on the plinth of the pedestal is the 
supplementary infomation (not in I.atin on the front): `Battles 
gained .... 5 / Strong Towns that Surrendered without Siege 
16 / Strong Towns besieged and taken . . . 24'. The equivalent area 
of the front of the plinth is chiselled with the words: `Illustrissima 
Vidua, Digna tali Tantoq Viro / D:D: Academiae Oxoniensi A:D: 
MDCCXXX.' The English translation is also inscribed on a white 
marble tablet set in a mottled grey marble surround in the Museum 
store. This presumably once served as a base. 
- Flffifu 
Prcscnted by Sarah, duchess of Marlborough, to the Bodleian hibrary 
in 1730. Transferred to the Ashmolcan Museum in 1926 (A»»"a/ 
Rcporf, 24) together with the bust of Gladstonc by Woolner 
(No. 597). By the mid-1950s the bust was displayed together with 
Nos. 558 and 559. 
There are, as Margaret Webb pointed out (A4¢.choc/ ftyy4r¢cfe 
Sc"/Pfo7 (Ilondon,1954), 95), two busts of the duke of 
Marlborough by Rysbrack, one in contemporary armour and 
a long wig (Blenhcim Palace), and the other wearing a wreath, 
antique armour with a lion's mark on his right shoulder, and 
a cloak adorned with a Garter Star. The Ashmolcan bust is 
an example of the second type of which other examples are 
recorded by Webb at Syon House, Wimbornc St Giles, and 
the National Portrait Gallery (2005, transferred from the 
British Museum in 1923). It seems never to have been 
observed in print that this second type is not in fact an 
independent invention by the artist but an abbrcviation-hcncc 
the unhappy cutting of the Garter Star-of the 
sculptor's full-length effigy of the duke made for the tomb 
in the chapel at Blenhcim. The angle at which the effigy has, 
inevitably, been photographed militates against recognition of 
this. Since the Ashmolean's version of the bust was presented 
to the Bodleian in 1730 that establishes a date for completion 
of Rysbrack's effigy at least as a model. The marble effigy was 
presumably among the `figures', `trophies', and `medals' 
described by the duchess as `ready to set up' in the chapel in 
May 1732 (ibid. 93). 
155
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry or workshop of L. Gcnneau (probably Paris) 
After John Michael RYSBRACK ( 1694-1770) 
567. Statuette of Sir Peter Paul 
Rubens 
61,8 cms, (height including integral plinth); 2.9 cms. (height of 
plinth); 22.2 cms. (length of plinth); 19.4 cms. (width of plinth); 
26.5 cms. (length of plinth) 
Bronze with a dark brown patina won to olive green-brown on the 
plinth and on the figure's right hand, nose, and forehead. The 
brown patina has traces of a ruddy gold when well lit. Hollow, sand-cast, 
in several pieces. The base together with the draped pedestal 
behind the figure forms one unit and the upper half of the figure is 
bolted and soldered to this. The figure's right arm and left hand 
are also separately cast. The surface is very meticulously tooled and 
all the drapery is finely and freely cross-hatched. `D. pETRvS. PAVLVS. 
RVBBENS. EQVES' is chiselled across the back of the plinth of the 
pedestal, `Petro Pauol Rubens' in imitation of the artist's own 
signature in Italian is chiselled across the back of the plinth below 
this, and `Michel Rycbrack [J;c] / 1632' with a line below the date 
is chiselled on the side of the plinth of the pedestal. There is an 
indecipherable flourish at the end of `Pauol' in the artist's signature. 
Bought in 1963. Redstered on 25 October with the name of the 
vendor left blank. 
Vcrtue informs us that the success of Peter Schecmakers's 
monument to Shakespeare in Westminster Abbey led to a 
decline in Rysbrack's business as a sculptor. We may speculate 
that the success of Roubiliac may also have caused this. In 
his new-found leisure, surely recalling a commission, reccivcd 
from Lord Burlington in the 1720s, for portraits of Inigo 
Jones and Palladio, and perhaps also influenced by the fact 
that his rival Scheemakers had made such a hit with a figure 
in historical dress, and also newly alert to his alien status (not 
a compatriot of Shakespeare ), Rysbrack made `three moddels 
in clay, being the representations of 3 most excellent Artists 
(about 2 foot hi each figure) Rubens. Vandyke & Fiamingo 
Quenoy [i.e. Duquesnoy] all thrcc his Country men'. Vertuc 
enormously admired them ( `Notebooks', iri, W¢/fJo/e SocG.rty, 
22 ( 19334),116). That was in 1743 and in the following 
year, on 4 January in the D¢¢./y Adrcr}¢.fc7r, Joseph Van Aken, 
the drapery painter, solicited subscriptions for an edition of 
the three figures in plaster of Paris (asking 7± guineas for the 
set). The models could be viewed and orders placed in 
Rysbrack's studio, so it is reasonable to suppose that the 
sculptor retained an interest in the venture. Nine monochrome 
off paintings of the three figures by William Grecne the 
younger may have served as part of the promotion of this 
`publication', as is suggested by Katharine Eustace ( M¢.choc/ 
Ryr4"¢cfe (City of Bristol Museum and All Gallery, 1982), 
13844). She also notes that it seems to have been after Van 
Akcn's death in 1749 that John Checre took up the 
production of plasters. The origival models of Rubens and 
Van Dyck were lots 73 and 74 of the studio sale of `Joseph 
Vinhaccken . . . drapery paintcr' at Langford's, Ijondon,11 
February 1750/1, together with many plaster casts. Cheere 
156 
was not the only supplier of plaster casts. Some appear for 
sale with their brackets in the `stock in trade of Mr Atkinson 
of picadilly lately dcceased' auctioned by Burnsall, London, 
on 2 April 1767. Some were also sold, at 2 guineas each, by 
Charles Harris, sometime before 1795 and there are examples 
in press-moulded terracotta, stoneware, and ivory. But there 
arc no bronze reproductions which can certainly be dated to 
the cightecnth century although Chcere's plasters were given 
a bronze colouring. Rysbrack also made marble busts from 
the three figures in 1746. 
The claim made by Ian Robertson in the A"„"a/ RGPo7¢ 
for 1963 (p. 53) that this bronze version of Rysbrack's R#Z7e»J 
statuette is actually `the work of ' Rysbrack seems highly 
optimistic. The chiselled letters of his mme copy laboriously 
those incised in clay by the artist. A contemporary craftsman 
might have been responsible for this, although chiselled 
imitations of cursive script are not usual before the last century. 
But if it was done by a contemporary they would surely not 
have mistaken the `s' in Rysbrack for a `c'. The best explanation 
for this mistake is that the bronze worker had a slightly 
defective or blurred cast as his source and had no idea who 
Rysbrack was. This would also explain the absence of a proper 
hilt or sheath for the sword in the bronze statucttc for these 
are likely to have been missing in a poor cast. This theory 
also makes sense of the date 1632 below the signature. The 
bronze worker who had not heard of Rysbrack may well have 
supposed that hc was a contemporary of Rubens and that the 
portrait was made from life; he would in that case have hit 
on a seventeenth-century date for the work (had he given 
much thought to the matter, however, he might have chosen 
an earlier one since Rubens was 55 years old in 1632 and 
looks younger here). The other inscriptions on the bronze 
are imitations of Rubens's own signature as he signed his own 
letters and paintings. The idea of recording the handwriting 
with the likeness of a sitter seems to have origivatcd in the 
early nineteenth century-the medallions of great men by 
David D'Angers testify to an enthusiasm for graphology, then 
a new and exciting scicncc. 
There is, then, reason to suspect that this bronze is a 
nineteenth-century cast and this is strongly supported by its 
composite, sand-cast, structure typical of Parisian nincteenth-century 
foundries. There is another version of the bronze on 
deposit with the sculpture department at Sotheby's in Bond 
Street which is identical except that it is signed `Miche 
Rybsrack [f¢.c] / 1743' and has the latinate and capitalized, 
but not the Italianate cursive, version of Rubens's name. A 
version is also in the Victoria and Albert Museum, paired with 
one after Rysbrack's Van Dyck (A. 24 and A. 23-1955). 
Rysbrack's signature in this case is also `Miche' as in the 
Sotheby's version but `L. GENNEAU' is chiselled together with 
the I.atinate capitalized name behind. A note of 1977 in the 
Victoria and Albert Muscum's files records another pair in 
the Bcaverbrook Art Gallery, Fredericton, New Brunswick, 
Canada, marked `Soci6te des Bronzes'. Genneau is not 
otherwise known to us, either as a c¢.Jc/e#7 or a founder, but 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
it is a French or BelSan name and the Soci6t6 dcs Bronzes 
was presumably a French or Belgian firm. 
It is not hard to understand why Rysbrack's statuettes 
should have been reproduced in bronze in France in the 
second half (I would suspect in the last quarter) of the last 
century. Albert Ernest Carrier-Bellcuse's statuettes of raphael 
and Michelangelo were cast by Deniere in 1855 (a dated pair 
are in the Ijouvre). He followed these with Leonardo, Cclhi, 
Murillo, Velazquez, also standing, and a seated Dtirer-this 
last incorporating an imitation of the artist's signature (an 
example was lot 81, Sotheby's, London, 4-7 November 
1988). Other sculptors and founders saw their opportunity: 
Jean Jacques Feuchere's models of I'alissy and Cellini were 
cast by E. de I,abrouc; Genneau would seem to have exploited 
the models already made in England. There is a possibhity 
also that knowledge of Rysbrack's initiative of the mid-eighteenth 
century stimulated that of Carrier-Bclleuse a 
hundred years later, especiany since in 1855, the date of the 
Raphael and Michelangelo, he had just returned to France 
having spent five years working as a modeller for Minton's 
factory in Stoke-on-Trent. 
157
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps John Michael RYSBRACK ( 1694-1770) 
568. Portrait bust of an unknown 
lady 
60.6 cms. (height including socle); 14.5 cms. (height of socle) 
Lead. Hollow cast with thick walls. The surface has been dented in 
several places most conspicuously in the centre of the forehead. 
There are also numerous scratches including deep ones on the upper 
chest, the proper right cheek, and across the chin. There is a crack 
in the cast across the foremost and lowest fold of the drapery. The 
lead has clearly been tooled after casting-the sharp lines of the 
front curls of the hair and of the eyebrows are particularly indicative 
of this (see also below). There are traces of a white deposit in some 
of the hollows, perhaps suggesting that the bust was originally 
painted. The interior of the bust has been filled with mastic and the 
bust has been mounted on a turned and waisted serpentine soclc 
(certainly not origival). 
Bought in 1933. From the dealer `Marcussen' according to the entry 
in the University Gallery Benefactions Book perhaps at the same 
time as No. 401. 
The bust was described by the Keeper, Kenneth Clark, in the 
A""#¢/ Rcpo# ( 1933: 25) as in the `style of Rysbrack' and 
this seems just. It is certainly a fine work of this period. An 
idiosyncraticfeatureisthescalloped,almostpetal-ukecharacter 
of the undergarment and this may be compared with the 
treatment of the drapery in Rysbrack's bust of I.ady Margaret 
Cavendish-Holles-Harley dated 1723 (at Welbeck Abbey, 
Nottinghamshire, reproduced as pl. 35 in M.I. Webb, 
A4¢.c¢¢e/ ftysb"¢c4 Sc#/Pfo7 (London, 1954) ). The hair has 
been given a granulated texture with a punch after casting 
and lines chisellcd on top of this. Exactly the same technique 
may be observed in Henry Cheere's superb lead bust of the 
duke of Cunberland at Belton House (bought 1747, 
Bel/M/44), but it need not have been special to Cheere. 
The bust has been very carefully and tactfully restored, 
doubtless after acquisition, and it is clear from a letter written 
by Clark to H. H. E. Craster, Bodley's Librarian, on 3 
February 1933 that credit for this should be given to `Our 
restorer, Young . . . generally reckoned one of the best 
restorers in the Country and . . . responsible for many of the 
masteapicces in the Muscum'-in draft, Clack wrote, `8c no 
one knows how much of the masterpieces in the Museum 
are his work'. Clark added that he was a `slow worker and 
paid a retaining fee by the Department of Andquities and is 
therefore bound to give up most of his time to their work. It 
is also almost impossible to get an estimate from him; I have 
never had an account from him since I have been here.' 
158 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Possibly the factory of SHORE of Matlock (flourished mid-ninctccnth 
century) 
569. Crater-shaped vase on a 
pedestal 
42.2 cms. (height); 17.4 cms. (height of pcdcstal); 20.8 cms. 
(diameter of vase at lip); 15.7 cms. (length a.nd width of plinth 
ofpcdcstal) 
The body of the vase is fashioned from an unusually large block of 
Dcrbyshirc fluorspar (blue-john). It is hollow only above the 
handles. The foot is fashioned from a separate piece. The pedestal 
consists of blocks of white Camra marble forming base and crown 
mouldings, and sides of fluorspar veneered over a core. The plinth 
of the va.se and pedestal are of black marble (probably Derbyshire 
black marble, from the Ash ford quarry). There is a plate of brass 
under the pcdestal's plinth. The pair of foliate handles and the thin 
bands of ornamental moulding between foot a.nd body, foot and 
base of the vase, and at the edge of the base are of lacquered brass. 
The components are held together by a long bolt. 
Bequeathed by Major Thomas Bouch in 1963. Received by the 
museum on 20 November 1963. See also Nos. 451, 452, and 469. 
Blue-john had been employed omamentally since the middle 
of the eighteenth century, at first by local craftsmen but 
during the 1770s by the factory of Matthew Boulton at Soho 
(see Nos. 451-2, 608-9). After 1780 the material was 
available to craftsmen all over Britain but seems mostly to 
have been worked and mounted by firms in Derbyshire. The 
urns associated with Boulton are always solid, as was indeed 
an advantage for the relatively heavy candle branches often 
attached to them. Hollow work began to be made in the 
1780s and by 1802 the technique, which involved heating 
the stone and appl)ing resin, was very advanced and the 
delicacy of the translucent vases turned on water lathes is 
speciauy mentioned in John Mawe's A4l¢."c#¢/og}y a/Dc#kyul}G.rc 
(Derby, 1802), 75. In 1848 Robert Hcnson, addressing the 
Western Literary Institution in Leiccster Square (in a lecture 
published in B„¢./der, 6/307 (23 Dec. 1848), 617-18), 
marvelled at the blue-john vases which could be illuminated 
by a taper. Hc noted in particular the products of Thomas 
I.ambc's silk mill in Derby which had long since convcrtcd to 
working blue-john-this was the factory of either Shore, 
Evens, or Brown who were the chief rivals in the business. `A 
prodigal waste of this stone was once carried on when 
abundance could be obtained from the mine, but now it is 
extremely scarce and expensive, the price has risen from fl4 
to fro per ton, and even larger sums have been given for very 
fine specimens.' The waste thrown out in the eightccnth 
century was by then being collected from the River Derwent 
for rcworking. 
The firm which was especially noted for large, hollow, 
turned vessels was that of Shore-some of these were as high 
as 2 feet (A. E. 0llercnshaw and R J. and D. Harrison, A 
H¢.#ory a/B/#c/o4„ Sfo„c (Brighouse, n.d. [c.1960]),18- 
19). This remarkable exanplc may bc tentatively attributed to 
that factory. The character of the fohatc handles and the 
curvature of the lip of the crater are alike characteristic of the 
revival of the rococo in the decorative arts at the time of the 
Great Exhibition. The unhappy conjunction of the handles 
with the gadrooning is a typical consequcncc of provincial 
manufacture-there was technical skill in working the stone 
but not much taste in the design of the final product and the 
stone workers were separate from the suppliers of the mounts 
(which were probably purchased `ready-made') so that the 
vases were not conceived of as a whole. In the better 
eighteenth-century work in this material the amber-coloured 
stone (as in the body of the vase here) was not contrasted 
with the amethyst (as in the pedestal here) but stone of a 
similar colour was used throughout. 
lFT.I,1,,.,,,,,,,,I:1,,, 
159
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknoun foundry 
After Phoebe STABLER (d.1955) 
570. Faggot gatherer 
22.5 cms. (height including integral base) 
Bronze with a very dark brown patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. 
Incised in the model in the integral, naturalistic, base to proper left 
`P.G. STABLER 1910'. 
Given in 1956 by Cyril da Costa Andrade of Morocco House, 
Bayard's Cove, near Dartmouth, Devon, together with No. 487. 
Redstcred on 3 October. 
Andrade was a considerable benefactor to the Department 
but his interest was chiefly in the field of ceramics rather than 
sculpture. Phocbe Stabler, however, had made her reputation 
as a modeller for ceramics not long after this model was 
signed, when the rights on her `Picardy Peasants' were 
purchased for reproduction in earthenware and bone china 
by the Doulton Burslem factory at the instigation of its art 
director Charles J. Nokes. The rights were purchased in 1911 
and her figurines launched in the `HN' Range in 1913. She 
exhibited bronze statuettes at the Royal Academy during the 
same period (the earliest being Gr¢7¢ny in 1911, no.1814, 
which might bc identical with the work catalogued here). 
Mrs Stabler seems never to have given her date of birth to a 
work of reference. In 1906 she married Harold Stabler, who 
was born in 1872. He worked as a sculptor, potter, and 
jeweller. 
160 
Probably the foundry of J. W. Singer, Frome, Somerset 
After Alfred STEVENS ( 1817-75 ) 
571 and 572. Pair of allegorical 
groups from the monument to the 
duke of wellington: Valour with 
Cowardice (571); Truth with 
Falsehood ( 572) 
64.5 cms. (height of No. 571); 37 cms. (length of No. 571); 
30.5 cms. (length of No. 571 at base); 26.2 cms. (width of 
No. 571 ); 60 cms. (height of No. 572); 41 cms. (length of 
No. 572); 25.5 cms. (width of No. 572) 
Bronze with a black to chestnut patina. Hollow, sand-cast. Each 
group is cast in one piece. No. 571 is hollow behind. Core remains 
in the right leg of valour and the right arm of Truth and both arms 
of Falsehood. A wire armature also remains in the arms of Falsehood. 
There are numerous vestigial seams from the piece-moulded plaster 
casts (from which the casting models were taken). 
Bought at Sotheby's, I.ondon, 31 October 1962, lot I from the 
collection of Frank RInder by Colnaghi acting at short notice for 
Gerald Taylor who had admired them a short while before the 
auction commenced. Bought from Mr Taylor and registered early 
August 1963. Placed on brackets in the Print Room, above the 
solander cabinets on the north wall, where they have remained. 
The history of Alfred Stevens's monument to the duke of 
Wellington in St Paul's Cathedral has been traced in great 
detail by John Physick in 7%G We%79gfo7¢ 44o"#7"G"f (HMSO, 
1970). The first proposal for the monument was made not 
long after the duke was buried in St Paul's in 1852 when Sir 
William Molesworth, First Commissioner of works, found 
himself with ca3,000 left out of the floo,000 voted by 
Parliament for the funeral expenses. Molesworth's planned 
limited competition was abandoned in 1855 and an open 
competition was announced by his successor, Sir Benjamin 
Hall, in September of the following year. On 7 August 1857 
Stevens's design was one of six placed equal fourth in the 
competition-the value of the competition was, however, 
much diminished by the fact that the only judge profcssionany 
connected with the arts, C. R. Cockerell, declined to 
participate in the final decision. 
Stevens's model in plaster and wax, 9 fcct 9 inches high, 
now in the Victoria and Albert Museum (44-1878), was 
published in the I//#ffr¢£Gd lo„do„ Niow7J on 12 September 
1857, whose critic admired the way that the `vanquished 
figures were flung out from the pile with a boldness and 
terrific spirit'. They were not, however, universany approved 
and the Ecc/cfG.a/ogrS.ff, champion of the Gothic Revival, found 
the `demonology' both `intrusive and unintchictble'. The 
announcement that Stevens's design had been selected was 
made in June 1858 and he was offered the commission 
provided he made a full-sized model. He agreed to this 
Condition on 9 September 1858. The model for the group 
of Truth was `almost two thirds complcte' by 27 November 
1860, but work on the model as a whole proceeded slowly 
and it was not until January 1867 that it was sufficiently 
advanced for Stevens to be given permission to proceed with 
the sculpture. 
The plaster casts of the full-sized models for the groups in 
the Victoria and Albert Museum (32la and 32lb-1878) show 
many minor deviations from the origivial models (which are 
reflected in the Ashmolean's bronzes)-for instance, the club 
of Hercules is held by Valour at a different angle, the right 
leg of Truth is draped, and Falsehood's left hand clutches a 
ball. These casts probably date from 1866. The models wcrc 
being prepared for casting in the summer of 1870, but the 
groups had not been cast when Stevens died on I May 1875. 
The bronzes were, however, ready by the summer of 1876 
when, together with the effigy of the duke, they were exhibited 
at the Royal Academy (as nos.1427 and 1522). The 
monument was unvcfled in 1878. In 1894 it was moved to 
the location in St Paul's which had origivally been proposed 
for it. The crowning equestrian statue, however, which had 
origivally been planned but which was then objected to by 
the Dean of st Paul's, was not placed in position until 1903 
and the monument was not finally unveiled until 1912. 
As Ian Robertson observed in the A#"#¢/ RGPo77 ( 1963: 
53) a study for the figure of valour was among the group of 
drawings by Stcvens in the Department's collection. It had 
been part of the Madan Bequest in 1962 and so was very 
much in the minds of the curatorial staff. He suggested that 
the Ashmolean's bronzes were `likely to have been one of the 
four pairs included in the first day of Stevcns's studio sale 19 
July 1877 lots 4649', but there is no cvidcncc for this and 
the casts mentioned in these lots must have been of plaster 
(they sold for cvcry little). Robcrtson recorded three other 
pairs: those in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the City 
Museum and Art Gallery, Leiccster, and in the collection of 
Mr and Mrs Charles Handley-Read, with the inphcation that 
these were the other three pairs in the sale. Thcrc are in fact 
numerous other bronze casts of this type (for instance, in the 
National Gallery of Scotland, 2057, the National Ganery of 
Ireland, 65-8075 and 59-8076, Fitzwilliani Museum, 
Cambridge) and it is known that the pair in the Victoria and 
Albert Museum (on loan to the Mappin Art Gallery, Sheffield 
(264 and 265-1896) were bought for £25 each in 1896 from 
the Singer foundry and were cast from plasters in the 
possession of John R Clayton (see S. Jcrvis (ed.), V¢.cfo".¢„ 
¢»d Ed7p¢kd¢.fl» DGcor¢£¢.pc A# (catalogue of the Handley-
Read Collection, Royal Academy, I.ondon, 1972), 58-9, cat. 
mos. C84-5 by Iidvinia Handley-Read). It is likely that the 
Ashmolean pair belong to the sanie large commercial 
posthumous edition. The plaster casts in Clayton's possession 
were evidently made in a piece-mould from an origival sketchy 
clay model (or, more probably, from a plaster made in a waste 
mould from such a clay model) made by Stevcns in connection 
with his origival competition model exhibited in 1857. It is 
most unlikely that Stevcns would have wanted a work of this 
character to be converted into bronze. By 1896 of course 
161
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Stevcns was acknowledged as a genius and moreover as the 
spiritual parent of the `New Sculpture'. His sketches were 
valued. The monument to Wellington was by then being 
treated as a monument to Stevcns as well as to Wellington. 
162 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
)ohm Macallan SWAN RA ( 1847-1910) 
573. Head of a puma 
7.8 cms, (length) 
Red wax. There is a small chip missing from the animal's right car. 
`Macallam Swan' is incised in the wax in a bold cursive hand with 
a sharp modelling tool below the animal's right ear. On the opposite 
side of the head a word, possibly `puma', is incised in a similar style. 
Mounted by means of an oriSnal copper prong on a velvet covered 
pedestal. 
Purchased 1966 from Alfred Spero of 4 Park Mansions Arcade, 
Knightsbridge. Registered on or soon after 19 April (the entry is 
undated but the previous entry carries this date). 
The wax model is hard to date. Swan's ro#„g f¢givr was 
exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1889 and thereafter he 
enjoyed a reputation for his vivid sketches of wild animals, 
indebted to the traditions of French ¢"¢.ow¢/G.G7r bronzes, such 
as those of Fr6mict under whom Swan had studied in the 
1870s. 
Charles SYKES ( 1875-1950) 
574. Eve, a Waning to Woman 
11.3 cms. (height including integral base); 3.55 cms. (height of 
base); 3.4 cms. (length of base); 3 cms. (width of base) 
Bronze with a dark green and brown patina worn to golden brown 
on hair and apple. Hollow cast. Faintly signed in the model on the 
sides of the block at the back below the figurc's left buttock `C. S. 
Sykcs'. 
Given by Mrs Jessica Sykes, of Gothic House, Drayton by Abingdon, 
Bcrkshire, in memory of her husband the sculptor,1953. Rcctstercd 
on 28 May. See also No. 575. 
The date of this curious and grotesque work is not recorded, 
but it may be a miniature, private, and half-satirical rcsponsc 
to controversial heroic sculpture by Jacob Epstein such as his 
Gc„efG.f of 1931 (Seravczza marble, Granada Television 
Collection on loan to the Whitworth Art Gallery, University 
of Manchester). Nothing could be less like Sykcs's bcst-known 
sculpture, the SpG.r¢.f a/Gcj£#ty, which, in various sizes 
and finishes and with minor variations, has served as a mascot 
for Rolls-Royce since early in 1911. 
163
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Charles SYKES ( 1875-1950) 
575. Europa 
20.8 cms. (height of bronze); 27.5 cms. (length of bronze); 
2.8 cms. (height of plinth); 27 cms. (length of plinth); 9.2 cms. 
(width of plinth) 
Bronze with a golden brown patina. Hollow cast. Mounted on a 
plinth of pale walnut. One label on the underside of the plinth 
reveals that the bronze was exhibited between 1943 and 1944 at the 
Russell Cotes Art Gallery, Boumcmouth; another that it was 
included in a memorial exhibition at Walker's Galleries, 118 Bond 
St, I,ondon. Thcrc is also a label marked with the price £38. 
Given by Mrs Jessica Sykcs, of Gothic House, Drayton by Abingdon, 
Bcrkshire, in memory of her husband the sculptor,1953. Rctlstcred 
on 28 May. See also No. 574. 
164 
The labels on the reverse of the phnth suggest this sculpture 
must date from before 1943 and it would seem likely to 
belong to the 1930s. The subject of Europa and the Bull was 
made enormously popular in European sculpture by the 
famous bronze by the Swedish sculptor Carl Mines of 1923- 
4 (one cast of which is in the Tate Gallery, I.ondon). Other 
British sculptors to have attcmptcd it during the 1930s were 
Joseph Else and S. Nicholson Babb (see ModGow Sc#/P£#"G, 
the photographic anthology published by the Royal Society 
of British Sculptors, I.ondon, no date, but 193940, pp. 8 
and 30). For the popularity of this subject generally in Europe 
see U. Berger, `Europa in neuer Gestalt', in D¢.c VGrf#47`¢¢"g 
de7 E#7iop¢ ( Kunstgewerbcmuscum, West Berlin, 1988 ). 
What appear to be preliminary pencil drawings for Sykes's 
E#rop¢ were, in April 1978, in a private collection in Ascot, 
Berkshirc. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
165
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Frederick TATIIAM ( 1805-78 ) 
576. Hcad of an antique warrior 
62.3 cms. (height) 
Carrara marble. Drilling is evident in several areas, under the peak 
of the helmet, beside the curls of hair, and under the moustache. 
There are rough chisel marks apparent on the brow. 
`FRED? / TATHAM / 1830.' is chiscllcd on the face of the integral 
soclc below the back of the neck. 
Bought for £3,200 on 7 July 1988 from Jonathan Clark Ltd, 18 
Park Walk, h)ndon Swlo. The sculpture was drawn to the Kecper's 
attention by Mr and Mrs John Gerc. 
Frederick Tatham was the eldest son of the architect Charles 
Heathcotc Tatham ( 1772-1842). He was awarded the Silver 
Palette from the Society of Arts in 1824 and chiefly exhibited 
portrait miniatures at the Royal Academy, but between 1825 
and 1832 he was active as a sculptor showing work at both 
the British Institution, including, in 1829, 777c E"j/¢pcd 
Tvy#"f (no. 535) and 77lc DyG.»g W¢rr¢.o7 (no. 541), and the 
Royal Academy. The curious socle of two superimposed 
blocks with chamfcred corners, by which the head, cut off 
obliquely below the bare neck, appears to have been impaled 
at random, is paralleled in some other British sculpture of this 
period, for instance Samuel Joseph's beautiful bust of an 
unknown woman of 1825 at Temple Newsan House, Leeds. 
•i-,,,,i,,,:,h'ri-,:,''::'',,,,.,,,,giv 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry of A. 8. Burton, Thames Ditton, Surrey 
Cccil THOMAS OBE, FRBs ( 1885-1976) 
577. Portrait head of Archibald 
G. 8. Russell 
58.2 cms. (height including pedestal); 17.5 cms. (height of 
pedestal); 17.6 cms. (length of pedestal); 17.7 cms. (width of 
pedestal) 
Bronze with a dull dark grey to green patina. Hollow, sand-cast, in 
one piece. `CECIL THOMAS / 1926' is incised funtly in the model 
on the side of the naITow uppermost step of the tapering pedestal, 
at the rear. `A. G. 8. Russell Bequest 1958' is written on a paper 
label in the interior of the pedestal. 
Bequeathed by Archibald Gcorgc Blomeficld Russell CVO, JP, 
Clarenceux FGng-of-Arms, who died March 1956. Received on 8 
October 1958 from Mr Russell's unofficially adopted daughter Mrs 
Stedall-item no. 9 in the receipt made on that occasion. It would 
seem that the Keeper, K. T. Parker, was not delighted at the prospect 
of receiving the bust, for in a xerox of the codicil added by Russell 
to his will in 1955 he wrote `No!' opposite this item. 
Cecil Thomas was apprcnticed to his father, a gem engraver, 
and the first of his exhibits at the Royal Academy was a case 
of four gems in 1909. While still working in the finjly 
workshop he studied sculpture at the Central School, at 
Hcatherly's, and at the Slade School and from the cutting of 
cameo profiles he graduated to larger portrait medallions. 
After service in the First World War as an intelligence officer 
he received a commission to commemorate the sons of I.ord 
and Lady Forster of Lepc. The recumbent cffigics (the first 
of many by him) attracted the notice of Archibald Russell, 
then Lancaster Herald, as did some of his portrait busts, four 
of which he published in `Thc Sculpture of Cccil Thomas' in 
A77 Worfe,I/4 (May-Aug. 1925). In the following year, it 
seems, Russell sat for Thomas and on a note dated 9 
December 1926 (in the card index he made of works of all 
in his collection) Russell recorded that the portrait head had 
been prcscnted to him by the sculptor but that he had paid 
fl710s. to A. 8. Burton of Thames Ditton, Surrey, for the 
casting. The portrait head was exhibited at the Royal Academy 
in 1929 (no.1560 `Archibald G. 8. Russell Esq., I.ancaster 
Herald-head, bronzc' ). 
In his article on Thomas's sculpture Russell had vcnturcd 
one criticism of the portraits: 
It may perhaps be questioned whether the problem of adjusting his 
portraiture to the conventional requirements of the base upon which 
it stands, has as yet been solved by Mr Thomas in a wholly satisfactory 
manner. In common with many other sculptors of our time, he 
suffers from the unfortunate legacy from as great a master as Rodin, 
whose too frequent practice it was to evade the undoubted 
difficulties presented by the transition bctwcen convention and 
realism, by leaving his work unfinished. It would appear moreover 
to be Mr Thomas's plan to carry the lines of the sculpture down to 
the base, whereas a more satisfying harmony would probably be 
obtained between the two by inverting the process and givng the 
head an upward spring from the base, and by assigning to the latter 
a somewhat more definite character, however formal, of its own. 
The stepped tapering pedestal and the somewhat heraldic 
treatment of the upper chest in this portrait must be a 
response to this criticism. The rose and crown on the pedestal 
identify Russell as I.ancastcr Herald. 
Thomas enjoyed considerable success as a sculptor chiefly 
of portraits but also of ideal or decorative figures for 
gardens---for instance, his Le¢P¢."g/£¢ reproduced in the 
Royal Society of British Sculpture's Mode" Sc#/p£„rc ( n.d. 
but 193940, p. 90)-and for architecture-for instance the 
heraldic decorations of the British Pavilion at the New York 
World's Fair in 1939, and the sculpture on the rebuilt Church 
of All Hallows by the Tower and St John of Jerusalem, 
Clerkenwell (both in Iondon). His best-known work, 
however, was for the Mint-among it, the rclicf portraits of 
Queen Elizabeth 11 for overseas coimge and the coronation 
medal and four of the reverses of the new UK coinage issued 
for the new reign. (See Who W¢f Who 1971-80 and the 
obituary in 7Z7G T¢.owcf, 20 September 1976. ) 
Archibald Russell becanc a major benefactor of the 
Ashmolean Museum, principally by Sfts to the Print Room, 
commencing in 1944 with fourteen of his finest drawings 
presented through the National Art-Collections Fund in 
memory of his son Lieutenant John Anthony Peregrine Russell 
who was killed in action in January 1941. 
167
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably the foundry of J. W. Singer, Frome, Somerset 
After [William] Hamo THORNYCROFT RA ( 1850-1925) 
578. The Mower 
58.7 cms. (height including plinth); 2.9 cms. (height of plinth); 
22.5 cms. (length of plinth); 16.7 cms. (width of plinth) 
Bronze with a rich chestnut patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. An iron 
armature is evident in the underside of the plinth, as is some core. 
The plinth may have been separately cast. `Hamo Thomycroft Sc. 
1920' is incised in the model on the proper right face of the plinth. 
`Hamo Thomycroft RA.' is incised in the model on the upper 
surface of the naturalistic plinth beside the figure's proper left foot. 
`As the tiny swell of our boat moved the river grass / Stood with 
suspended scythe to see us pass / -Matt. Arnold-' is incised in 
the model on rcaf face of the plinth, the letters not all distinctly 
legible owing to the burr. There is a small mark in front of the 
letters on the second line which could be an ampersand. 
Given by Agatha Thomycroft, the sculptor's widow ( 1864-1958 ), 
in 1940. A letter by her to the Keeper, Ion Robertson, of 24 April 
asks whether the Museum would `like to have this statuettcL-possibly 
on loan', adding that her late husband would have liked it 
to go there. 
Thornycroft signed a small wax model of a ih4lo7pGr "etf?.„g in 
1882 (Tate Gallery) and was planning a statue early in 1883 
when hc fell in love with the l8-year-old Agatha Cox. In 
Scptcmber of that year he expressed himself eager to start 
work on the clay model. In October he wrote to Agatha, by 
now his fiancee, sending her (together with a cookery book) 
selections from the poetry of Matthew Arnold in which he 
had marked some hnes from `Thyrsis', Arnold's monody 
commemorating Arthur Hugh Clough which was first 
published in 1866. The poet ponders on the girl who used 
to unmoor the skiff in which he and his Oxford friend `track'd 
the sly Thames shorc'- 
Where are the Mowers, who, as the tiny swell 
Of our boat passing heav'd the river-grass, 
Stood with suspended scythe to see us pass.>- 
They are all gone, and thou art gone as well. 
Most of these lines were to be printed in the Royal Academy 
catalogue and two of them were to be incised on the sculpture 
itself (inaccurately, perhaps from the sculptor's memory). 
Despite this association with a nostalSc pastoral the choice 
of subject matter may also reflect the political ideas of the 
sculptor's fiancee and her `sympathy with the hard-handed 
toilers' which he noted in his diary. He later claimed that he 
had anticipated both Meunier and Dalou in this heroic 
representation of a labourer. But the sculpture seems rather 
to blend ancient and modern as Arnold mingles Victorian 
Oxford with classical Sicily in his poem. The boots and 
leggivgs do make it a modern figure but the occupation is 
an ancient one and moreover one with strong symbolic 
connotations which are underlined by John Addington 
Symond's sonnet of 1884: 
Wc bless thee for thy labourer, earthbom, great, 
The dumb, sublime, strong scytheman on fate's shore. 
168 
Thornycroft's model during the last three months of 1883 
was Orazio Cervi. An early plan seems to have been for him 
to wear a shirt and to support the scythe over his shoulder. 
The full-sized clay model was completed on 6 April 1884 and 
so the figure could be included, as a plaster cast, in the 
Academy exhibition of th^at year where Gilbert's Jc¢7'.¢¢J 
(No. 500) and Rodin's 4gr ¢'¢¢.„¢¢." (No. 304) were also 
shown. It was much praised. The exhibited plaster was cast 
in bronze in 1894 and is in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. 
A sketch model, 8 inches high, dated 1884, was cast in bronze 
(but perhaps at a later date)-there is a version in the Walker 
Art Gallery, Liverpool. But the figure is most familiar as a 
bronze reduction such as the example catalogued here. One 
such was shown at the Royal Academy in 1889. There are 
examples in the Tate Gallery (TO 3963), the Harris Art 
Gallery, Prcston, and the National Museum of wales, Cardiff, 
as well as the Ashmolean Museum. (See E. Manning, A4l¢7ib/c 
and Bronze.. The Art and Life Of Huno Thormycroft (London 
and Westfield,1982), 88, 91-2, 207.) 
In May of 1890 the S¢£"7:dry Rov¢.eta? recorded that 
Thornycroft had issued a circular announcing a limited edition 
of bronze reproductions of `two of his best known statues' 
of which specimens with a variety of patinas could be viewed 
at his studio in Kensington. The two statues are likely to have 
bccn the GG7¢c7i¢/ Go7¢o" (see No. 579) and 177c A4lo7pe7. The 
Tate Gallery cast is incised in the model with 1888 and 1890 
and so may well be one of the statuettes made at this time. 
It is also numbered 15 (on the upper face of the p.linth behind 
the figure). This must have been an attempt to bypass the 
West End dealers, and above all Arthur Leslic Collie, who in 
the previous year had `published', with great success, the 7 
small bronze Go%¢o», cast by I. W. Singer and Son (who had 
mastered lost-wax casting at their foundry by 1888). Edmund 
Gosse in his article `Sculpture in the House', published in the 
A4l¢g#z¢.#G a/A# in 1895, included a photograph of 777G 
44lo7per on a marble chimney-piece surrounded by a typical 
elaborate overmantel of the period adorned with plates and 
vases by Arts and Crafts potters. (S. Beattie, 777c Nim7 Sc#/Pf#7G 
(New Haven, Conn., and I.ondon,1983),188-9.) Statuettes 
of 777c A4lowG7 continued to be in demand; the date of 1920 
on the Ashmolean's bronze may indicate when the sculptor 
decided to authorize a new edition-in this connection it is 
interesting that Mr Duncan James writing to Gerald Taylor 
on 10 July 1972 concerning bronzes in the Museum possibly 
cast by the Singer foundry (by then the Morris Singer 
Company of Basingstoke), of which he was writing an official 
history, mentioned that he had evidence of two casts of I77c 
A4:owey being cast by the firm in about 1924. Given that the 
Ashmolean's bronze belonged to the sculptor himself it also 
provides good evidence of the patina which hc preferred. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Probably the foundry of J. W. Singer and Son, Frome, 
Somersct 
After [WJliam] Hamo THORNYCROFT RA ( 1850-1925) 
579. Major-General Charles 
George Gordon 
36.8 cms. (height including integral plinth); 2.2 cms. (height of 
integral plinth); 12 cms. (length of plinth); 9.3 cms. (width of 
plinth); 12.6 cms. (height of marble pedestal); 14.8 cms. (length 
of marble pedestal); 12.8 cms. (width of marble pedestal) 
Bronze with a very dark brown patina won to a paler brown in a 
few salient areas. Hollow, sand-cast, in pieces. The divisions are not 
visible but the interior of the plinth reveals that it was cast together 
with the cannon but separately from the figure. `CHARLES GEORGE 
GORDON' is chiselled on the front face of the plinth. `puBLlsHED By 
ARTHUR LESLIE COLLIE / 398 OLD BOND S'' LONDON MAT 6TH 1889' 
is chiselled on the back face of the plinth. `HAMo THORNycROFT 
RA. /Sc.1888.' is chisclled on the upper naturalistic surface of the 
plinth across the front proper right comer. The baton under the 
figure's left elbow is broken off short. The statue came with, but is 
not at present displayed upon, a livery russet-coloured marble 
pedestal. 
Given by Mr D. F. W. Baden-Powell of Stone End, Hinksey, 
Oxfordshire, 1968. Registered 10 December. 
Cordon is depicted in thought, a cannon ball behind him, his 
foot upon a shattered mortar, his hand on a prayer-book, a 
baton under his arm, binoculars on his back: a man of vision 
and high principle, `rcsolute, solitary, but not sad', on the 
field of battle. The statuette differs only in very small detals 
from the large bronze statue which was unveiled in Trafalgar 
Square on 16 October 1888 and was removed to the garden 
of the Thames Embankment after World War 11. Plans for 
this statue commenced soon after Gordon's death in January 
1885; the commission was given to Thornycroft in August, 
hc had made a wax sketch model by January 1886, had 
completed a quarter-sized clay model at the end of september 
1886, and was working on the full-sized model throughout 
the first half of 1887. The bronze casting took place in 
October (E. Maming, Marble and Bronz,e: The Art and Life 
a/Hfli7ceo T77o7'7eycro/i ( I,ondon and Wcstfield, 1982 ), 1034, 
107-9, 202-3; S. Beattie, 7%c Nei?7 Sc#/P£"„c (New Haven, 
Conn., and I.ondon,1983), 203-5). 
Statuettes like the one in the Ashmolcan are not 
uncommon. See for example lot 99 at Christie's, London, 
24 September 1987; lot 127 at Phillips, I.ondon, I March 
1988; and lot 84 at Sothcby's, I.ondon, 28 April 1989. 
According to Manning (op. cit.), Thornycroft sold the 
copyright to Arthur Conic in January of 1889 for £50 and 
one-fifth of the net profits, but there was a separate edition 
of half a dozen sold by John Smith. This latter arrangement 
probably explains the unmarked versions of the statucttc such 
as that exhibited at the Br¢.£?.j4 Sc#/Pf#7c exhibition of the 
Fine Art Society in 1968 (as no.167). Susan Bcattie (op. cit.) 
points out that Collie exhibited three of the statuettes at the 
Arts and Crafts Society exhibition in 1891 with a statuette of 
John Bright as a companion piece, and also points out that 
170 
an article of 1892 in the Po7tyro/G.a claims that the casting was 
by the firm of singer and Son of Frome. Statuettes of Bright 
and Gordon are shown together on bookshelves with 
mezzotints after Joshua Reynolds ( such prints wcrc newly 
returned to fashion) in an article on small domestic bronzes 
by Edmund Gosse in A4l¢g¢2;¢."c a/A7¢ ( 1895), 368 
(reproduced by Beattic, op. cit. 191). 
Although Thornycroft became interested in lost-wax 
casting at the period in which he made this statuette, and 
although Singer and Son had new fachities for this process, 
the Go7ide# statuettes were sand-cast. It was not the first 
work by Thornycroft to be produced in a large edition on a 
small scale by this means. His W¢7'7i¢.o7 ¢#¢ ¢ Wo#"¢Gd ro#£fo, 
which won a gold medal at the Royal Academy in 1875, was 
cast later in an edition by J. A. Hatfield for the Art Union of 
I.ondon (rights wcrc obtained in 1876 but the example which 
was lot 37 at Sotheby's, Ijondon, 26 November 1986, was 
dated 1879) and `Drew and Co.' also signed some small 
bronzes of this group (for instance lot 82 at Sotheby's, 
Ijondon, 4 November l988)-Drew and Co having taken 
over the management of Cox and Sons' foundry at Thames 
Ditton (established 1874) shortly before it was taken over by 
James Moore. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
171
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps the firm of Domenico Brucciani and Sons 
After Pictro TORRIGIANO ( 1472-1528) 
580 and 581. Pair of ornamental 
pilasters 
80.4 cms. (height of both pilasters); 21 cms. (length and width 
of both pilasters) 
Plaster of Paris, with considerable ingrained dirt. Hollow cast with 
no visible seams. There are many chips missing at the edges but 
only a few to the ornamental relief. Some cement adheres to the 
base of both pilasters. 
Provenance uncertain but there may bc a connection with the `two 
square columns of white marble finely sculptured, temp. Hen. VIII' 
which were no. 485 on p. 146 of the C¢£#/og#e a/£4e 4r47eeo/G¢„ 
il4l#fc#ow of 1836 but were sent back to I.ondon to restore Henry 
VII's altar in Westminster Abbey by order of the Vice-Chancellor 
on 20 March 1880. 
The pilasters are cast from two marble oncs closely copied 
from two of the four bronze ones at the corners of the 
sarcophagus upon which repose the bronze cffiSes of King 
Henry VII and his queen executed between 1512 and 1518 
by Pietro Torridano for Henry VII's chapel in Westminster 
Abbey. Casts of these pilasters are found in Brucciani's 
Catalogtte Of Casts fior Schools which the Board of Edttcation 
Considers Sttitable for Schools and Classes Receiving Grants 
jio7» ¢.i (I.ondon, undated but before 1906 and probably 
about 1903), mos. 2306-7. 
172 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Foundry of Alessandro Parlanti, Parson's Green, Fulham 
After Alfred TURNER ( 1874-1940) 
582. Peace 
30.5 cms. (height including integral plinth); 17 cms. (length of 
integral plinth); 12.2 cms. (width of integral plinth) 
Bronze with a dark brown patina, golden brown in the more salient 
parts. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. 
Given by the sculptor's daughter, Jessica Tuner of 44 Munster 
Road, Fulham, after the exhibition of the work ofAlfred and 
Winifred Turner held at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, 21 June-
20 October 1988, through the National Art-Collections Fund. 
The bronze was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1914 
(no. 2131, `Peace---Statuette'). The sculptor's daughter, the 
donor, informs me that the statuette was connected with a 
commission for a public statue and it features in an old 
photograph placed by her in the Tate Gallery archive as part 
ofamaquctteforaprojectedmonuinenttoKingEdwardVII. 
The monarch was represented standing in front of the plinth 
with this figure seated against one side of it (to his left) and 
another female personification, probably Justice (she holds a 
balance and sword), seated against the other, with a lively 
St George on top of a globe crowning the top. If this 
monument was actually erected it is curious that there is no 
mention of it in the newspaper profiles of Tuner. Tuner was 
in1914atthehcightofhispowerandreputation.Thestatuette 
isinverymuchthesamestyleashisbronzegroupofMatcrnity 
of the Queen Victoria Memorial in Sheffield, completed ten 
years before. There is an account of his life and work in the 
catalogue of the exhibition at the Ashmolean Museuni 
mentioned above (pp. 7-32).
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Winifrcd TURNER ( 1903-83) 
583. Reclining woman with child 
30 cms. (height); 52 cms. (length) 
Teracotta of a rich orange colour. Incised `Winifred Turncr' by the 
feet. An old break in the comer of the mattress plinth behind the 
woman's right arm has been repaired. 
Given by the sculptor's elder sister, Jessica Tuner of 44 Munster 
Road, Fulham, after the exhibition of the work of Alfred and 
Winifred Turner held at the Ashmolcan Museum, Oxford, 21 June-
2 October 1988, through the National Art-Collections Fund. 
The statucttc is similar in style to sculpture which Winifrcd 
Turner exhibited in the mid-1930s such as 777o„g4f, 
completed by 1933 (Tatc Gallery), or Tty¢./¢j¢f, exhibited 
1936 (untraced but reproduced in Ray¢/ Ac¢deny I:##J£"fli£G¢ 
for that year). Comparable works of this size were included 
in the exhibition at the Ashmolean Museum mentioned above 
where there is also an account of the sculptor's life and work 
(pp. 32-9). 
174 
Ursula TYRWIIITT ( 1872-1966) 
584. Head of Gwen John 
25.7cms. (height); 18cms. (length) 
Terracotta of a pale beige colour. Mounted on a soft wood block 
covered with mustard yellow velvet. There is a small aperture behind 
the head. The head is hollow but plugged with clay at the neck after 
modelling. In this plug a rectangular hole has been made for a peg. 
Given by the artist in 1965. ReSstered on 25 June 
The head is said to have been modelled in about 1907. Gwen 
John was then one of Rodin's models in Paris and Tyrwhitt, 
who had become a close friend of Gwen John and her brother 
at the Sladc in the l890s, was studying at the Atelier Colarossi 
there. Rodin was prevailed upon to look at the bust and is 
said to have remarked `continuez'. It was Tyrwhitt's only 
effort as a sculptor, however, and she was chiefly a painter in 
oils and watercolour. She gave the Museum drawings by both 
Augustus and Gwen John in 1964 and 1966, together with 
drawings and paintings by Wilson Steer, Stanley Spencer, and 
others. A misleading note in the Register dates the head to 
1921. A reminiscence of the artist by Richard Buckle is 
published in the catalogue of the exhibition Urf#/¢ I)i7ia?¢z.#.. 
O#o"¢ P¢¢.„}Gr ¢7¢d Co//Gcfor held at the Ashmolean Museum 
October-November 1974 (in which the head was no. 49). 
Mrs Tyrwhitt lived for many years at 225 Iffley Road, Oxford. 
Her husband, Walter Tyrwhitt, was a second cousin and his 
branch of the fandly had been long settled in Oxford. The 
head seems to have been valued by the artist and was included 
in the Gwen John Memorial Exhibition at the Matthiesen 
Gauery, New Bond St, in 1946. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Factory of )osiali WEDGWOOD ( 1730-95) 
Probably after models by Henry Webbcr ( 1754-1826) 
585 and 586. Pair of `bouquetiers' 
in the form of sarcophagi rising 
from banks upon which figures of 
Zephyr (585) and Flora (586) 
recline, leaning against urns 
14.9 cms. (height of 585); 21.I cms. (length of 585); 12.5 cms. 
(width of 585); 15 cms. (height of 586); 20.3 cms. (length of 
586); 12.I cms. (width of 586) 
`Jasper ware' (fine hard stoneware, both pure white and stained). 
The figures and the ornaments are white, the rest the distinctive 
pale blue associated with Wedgwood. The banks, the sarcophagi, 
and their plinths seem to have been cast as one hollow unit from 
the sane mould in both 585 and 586. A platform was then fixed 
below and other elements-the figures (cast from a piece-mould), 
the uns, and the semi-transparent ornaments on the uns and 
sarcophad and leaves on the banks (the fomer from moulds, the 
latter freely modelled)-were added before firing. The figures are 
hollow as can be seen if Zephyr is examined from behind. In the case 
of 585 there are some losses on the thin leaves appred to the bank, 
and tiny cracks in the drapery by the side of the figure's left thigh, 
a chip missing from the top of the urn, and a minute one from one 
corner of the top of the sarcophagus. In the case of 586 there are 
tiny chips missing from the edge of the sarcophagus and minute 
firing cracks at the junction of the figure's right arm and her drapery 
and on the ledge beside her left arm. There are slight flaws in the 
casting of the figure's right foot distorting the distance between her 
largest toes and also the shape of her smallest toe. `WEDGwooD' is 
impressed on the underside of both 594 and 595. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. C. 289 and C. 290 in his 
large manuscript catalogue. These items, together with a blue and 
white cup and saucer (C. 291-2), `and other pieces of that same 
servicethreevasesandotherswereinapalaceatForh'andpurchascd, 
after, by me'. No date is given for the purchase but it is likely to 
have been in 1880 or shortly before. It is not included in the 
notebook catalogue compiled in the 1870s and is a lower number 
than C. 297 which was a piece ofwedgwood acquired in 1880. 
Fortnun described these pieces as `jardinieres or crocus vases' 
but they are more likely to have been `bough pots' or 
`bouquetiers' (Wedgwood's terms) for the display of cut 
flowers. Water could easily be poured in and out through the 
Hms beside the figures but it would be hard to introduce, and 
mpossible to remove, soil such as jardiniercs require. 
Fortnum in his large catalogue understandably identified the 
figures as `Cupid' and `? Psyche' but C. F. Ben altered this 
to read `Zephyrus' and `Flora', surely correctly. The female 
figure is identified as Psyche in the versions in green and 
white and blue and white jasper in the conection of Arthur 
Sanderson (F. RIthbone, A C¢£¢/og#c a/¢ Co//Gcffo% . . . 
(Ijondon, 1903), 45, nos.105, 106). iinother blue and white 
version in inferior condition is in the Buten Muscun of 
Wedgwood, Merion, Pennsylvania (H. M. Butcn, WGdgrwood 
R¢%.£¢.cf (Merion, 1969), 193, no. 3555). Versions have been 
dated 1780 and 1790 (Rathbone, op. cit.). Robin Rcilly 
informs mc that he has found no record of these pieces either 
in early catalogues or in manuscript records and notes that 
they arc very rare. Hc considers it likely that they were first 
produced c.1790-5. They have been attributed both to Henry 
Webber and to John Flaxman, but the style would be unusual 
for the latter. Webber was the son of a Swiss sculptor and a 
pupil of John Bacon. Hc was active as a modeller in wax and 
his first exhibit at the Royal Academy in 1775 was in this 
medium. In 1784 he entered into a seven-year contract with 
WedgwoodasamodcllerontherccommendationofReynolds 
and Chambers and he travelled to Rome and sent work back 
from there. His only large-scale work in marble is the 
monument to David Garrick in Westminster Abbey dated 
1797 in which the drapery folds are relatively smaller, and 
more repeated, than in these figurincslloser in style to 
Bacon. 
Fortnum was not a keen collector of British ceramics as he 
was of Italian Renaissance ones, but he liked to have samples 
of all major factories and bodies. Significantly these items were 
notacquiredinBritain,whercWedgwoodwaskeenlycollected 
by others, but in Italy. These `Bouquetiers' and some other 
pieces were, it seems, picked up by him in Ford' (where he 
rfught wen have been looking for mar'olica); a Wedgwood 
scent bottle (C. 297) was given to his wife by Alessandro 
Castcllani in Rome in 1880. 
175
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
176 
Henry WEEKES RA ( 1807-77) 
587. Bust portrait of an unknown 
man 
79.5 cms. (height including socle); 49 cms. (width); 13 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Plaster of Paris, coloured irregularly yellow-grey with spots of white 
revealed in parts where scratched or worn. Thick hollow cast. No 
seams are visible. The socle is broken and a large portion is missing. 
`H. WEEKES. SC.' is incised across the flat back of the bust. A paper 
label was formerly attached to the chest printed with the numerals 
182. 
Given by Mrs Austin Imgland of Clanfield House, Abingdon, in 
1973. ReSstered 3 May. 
A portrait of this type, with the generalized treatment of heavy 
drapery in the manner of Chantrey, for whom Wcckes worked 
as assistant and whose studio he took over in 1841, is hard 
to date but is most characteristic of weekes during the 1830s 
before he strove to achieve a more independent manner. 
177
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Sir RIchard WESTMACOTT RA ( 1775-1856) 
588. Hindu girl (fragment) 
32.5 cms (height); 41 cms. (length) 
Plaster of Paris, painted with a creamy stone colour. Hollow cast 
from a piece-mould with numerous vestigial seams rcmalning. The 
work is sawn across the upper chest. The sculpture was cleaned and 
restored in 1987 by Miss Rachel Kenward. A patch of cracked 
plaster across the front of the chest and a dent in the chin and the 
recently drilled-out eyes were repaired and painted to match the 
rest of the bust. 
Given to the University Galleries by the sculptor in 1851 (see 
Preliminary Essay 2). According to the H¢7?d4oo4 G#;dc of 1859 it 
was on display at the west end of the principal sculpture gallery (the 
Randolph Gallery) companion with a Brahmin also by Westmacott. 
It was still there in 1865 but was probably removed in the l880s 
and has been in store during the whole of this century. It was sawn 
up in 1939. 
Wcstmacott's monument to Alcxandcr Colvin is in St John's, 
the old Cathedral of Calcutta. It consists of a high refief of 
two female personifications-Commerce with a caduceus and 
Industry with a beehive-seated in an embrace above a 
sarcophagus which is inscribed `To the memory of/ Alexander 
Colvin. / This tablet is inscribed by/ The Merchants of 
Calcutta, / Who having for forty years witnessed in him / An 
union of those talents and virtues / Which best adorn their 
profession / Do most honor to a character in private 
life / Thus record / Their affectionate esteem for him whilst 
living, / And their sorrow for his death. / Born IIIrd APRIL 
178 
A.D. MDCCLVI. / Died XVI DECEMR A.D. 
MDCCCXVIII.' On a ledge in front of the sarcophagus to 
the bcholder's left is crouched a Hindu girl on a mat with 
her right hand upon her raised left knee and her other upon 
a water jar, her pensive expression indicating her grief at the 
loss of her benefactor. 
The monument is dated 1821 (and was therefore 
completed, but not necessarily erected, by then). Westmacott 
exhibited this figure at the Royal Academy in that year 
(no.1085, `A Hindoo girl; a statue in marble being pall of 
a monument to be erected in memory of Alexander Colvin, 
Esq.'). The idea of exhibiting a separate pathetic figure from 
a monument at the Royal Academy exhibition can be traced 
back to 1815 when Wcstmacott showed the kneeling negro 
slave from his monument to Charles James Fox made for 
Westminster Abbey. In 1819 he exhibited a mourning 
`Pcasant Girl' from his monument to Ijord Penrhyn at 
Llandcgai in North Wales (for which see N. 8. I'enny, C¢#grc¢ 
Monttments in Romantic England (Now HZNen, Corin., and 
I.ondon,1977),189-92). The success of these may have 
emboldened him to create his Ho#Jc/cJf £7i¢77c//c7', an 
independent figure which although designed as a monument 
was, significantly, purchased as a gallery piece (for Bowood 
by the earl of Lansdowne) when exhibited at the Academy 
in 1822. The `Brahmin' and `Mussulman Moulah' from his 
monument to Warren Hastings in Calcutta which 
Westmacott exhibited in 1829 owed something to the II¢.#d" 
g¢.71/ of 1821, whose significance had, however, never been as 
precise as these. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Sir Richard WESTMACOTT RA ( 1775-1856) 
589. Trial of socrates 
76.5 cms. (height); 128 cms. (length) 
Plaster of Paris, palntcd a creamy stone colour. The paint is 
extensively flaking especially on the podium and the figures of the 
judges and above the head of socrates. There are numerous small 
scratches and losses and chips are missing from the cloak of the 
figure leaning on a staff, from the top left corner, and from the 
projecting front ledge 
Given to the University Galleries by the sculptor in 1851 (see 
Preliminary Essay 2). According to the ZJ¢7¢dfroo4 G#¢.de of 1859 it 
was on display near Flaxman's S¢G.G/d a/Ac4¢.//" at the top of the 
stairs leading from the main sculpture gallery (the Randolph Gallery) 
to the Crypt or sub-gallery. It was still there in 1865 but was 
probably removed in the 1880s and has been in store during the 
whole of this century. 
Westmacott's relief of the Ty¢.¢/ a/Soc7¢££f was commissioned 
by Thomas Coke of Norfolk (later first carl of Leicester of 
the second creation) for his seat Holkham Hall. It was fiilly 
paid for on 27 December 1824 and was probably by then 
fixed in place in the great entrance hall where it remains. The 
total cost was £3616J. The first payment of fl50 was made 
in October 1821, but the work seems to have been 
contemplated if not commissioncd by 21 July 1818, 
apparently as a reflection of political pamphlets published in 
the previous year which attacked and defended Coke's Whig 
stance against the government's suspension of habcas corpus 
citing the trial of Socrates. Chantrey's relief of the signing of 
Magna Carta was made a decade later as a companion piece. 
These and other reliefs at Holkham are discussed and 
illustrated by W. 0. Hassall and N. 8. Penny, `Political 
Sculpture at Holkham', Co#%o¢.jirG#gr (July 1977), 207-11.
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Sir RIchard WESTMACOTT RA ( 1775-1856) 
590. Nymph with Zephyr 
(fragment) 
30.9 cms. (height); 36.4 cms. (width) 
Plaster of Paris, coated with shellac, now discoloured. Hollow cast, 
recording the lost original clay model. The work is sawn across the 
back wall of plaster and cracked across the thinner front wall. The 
nymph's ralscd left arm is terminated at what was an oridnal joint 
in the cast. The broken pine support now projecting was thrust into 
the wet plaster of the cast body to serve as an armature for the 
separately cast arm which would be slipped over it. 
Given to the University Galleries by the sculptor in 1851 (see 
Preliminary Essay 2). According to the H¢„¢froo¢ G#£de of 1859 it 
was on display in a recess of the Chantrey Gallery (the present Ruskin 
Lecture Hall) companion with a `Beggar Girl' (the Q)(Pry, No. 601). 
It was still there in 1865 but was probably removed in the l880s 
and has been in store during the whole of this century. It was sawn 
up in 1939. 
Westmacott's `Groupe, in marble of a Nymph and Zephyr, 
for the Gallery of Earl Grosvenor', consisting of a nude givl 
clutching a putto with butterfly wings to her bosom with her 
180 
right arm and holding a butterfly just out of his reach with 
her left, was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1828 (as 
no.1214). The group was a variant on a theme Westmacott 
commenced in the Nyowp¢ 7pG.*¢ Cape.¢ exhibited the year 
before (for the earl of Egremont at Petworth). He employed 
the same model for both these nymphs and for his N)JowP47 
#»c/4JJP¢."g 4G7 zo7¢e exhibited 1824 ( fomerly at Castle 
Howard, the plaster of which survives in the Soane Museum). 
The Nyowp¢ w¢.£¢ Zcpkyr was commissioned by the second 
Earl Grosvenor (later marquess of westminster) and survives 
in the family possession (with some small sad losses) at Eaton 
Hall, Cheshire. The esteem with which it was regarded when 
acquired is reflected by its inclusion among the art treasures 
in the group portrait of the Grosvcnor family in the sumptuous 
new gallery of their I,ondon house painted by Charles Robert 
Leslie in 1831 ( 777c Trc¢f#rc Ho#fGf a/B".ira;¢." (National 
Gallery of Art, Washington,1985), no. 530, p. 580). With 
the exception of the unsuccessful Eap¢rny"c, the Nyowp¢ ¢»¢ 
ZGpkyr was Westmacott's last exercise in the mode of 
Canovian classical sculpture which he commenced in 1822 
(the year of Canova's death) with his C„P¢.d and Pryc4c for 
the duke of Bcdford. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
181
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Sir Richard WESTMACOTT RA ( 1775-1856) 
591. Bust portrait of the llth earl 
of Pembroke 
56 cms. (height, including socle); 13 cms. (height of socle); 
20 cms. (diameter of soclc) 
Plaster of Paris, painted a creamy stone colour in two coats on top 
of a dirty and yellowed coat of shellac. The paint has flaked 
extensively and on the socle the dirty layer is exposed. The cast has 
thick walls. Thcrc is a crack across the neck and collarbone. 
`WESTMACoTr' is stamped in the plaster on the back of the socle. 
`100' is printed on a paper label stuck to the tablet of the socle. 
Given to the University Galleries by the sculptor in 1851 (see 
Preliminary Essay 2). Probably displayed with the busts by Chantrey 
for about thirty years and thereafter stored with them. I.ong believed 
to be one of the busts by Chantrey. 
Westmacott's monument to the eleventh earl of Pembroke in 
the nco-Romanesque parish church at Wilton, Wiltshire, 
consists of a relief of a group of peasants lamenting their 
protector whose bust is placed in a tondo above (see N. 8. -Penny , Church Monuments in Romantic_ Pngl?nd I:r:: , 
Haven, Conn., and Ijondon, 1977), pl.18 and p.196). This 
bust is the same as the version on the monument but without 
drapery and with a socle. The earl died in 1827. A marble 
version of the bust in Wilton House is dated 1830. 
182 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Sir Richard WESTMACOTT RA ( 1775-1856) 
592. Gypsy (fragment) 
29 cms. (height from fractured chest to top of head) 
plaster of Paris, painted, probably oridnally, with a creamy stone 
colour now brown. Hollow cast, recording the lost original clay 
model. The work is sawn across the upper chest and smashed, 
perhaps subsequently, around the sawn edge. The sculpture was 
cleaned in 1987 by Miss Rachel Kcnward. 
Given to the University Galleries by the sculptor in 1851 (see 
Preliminary Essay 2). According to the H¢»d4oo4 G"¢.de of 1859 it 
was on display in a recess of the Chantrcy Gallery (the present Ruskin 
Lecture Hall) companion with a `Nymph and Cupid' (Nyowp47 wZ£¢ 
ZGpkyr, No. 590). It was still there in 1865 but was probably removed 
in the 1880s and has been in store during the whole of this century. 
It was sawn up in 1939. 
Westmacott's sculpture of a seated gypsy girl exhibited at the 
Royal Academy in 1832 (no. I 178, as `The Gipsey; a statue 
in marble'), was acquired by the fourth earl of Egremont for 
the great sculpture collection at Silvcrton Park, but is now 
untraced. In a letter of 12 January 1852 in the Department's 
archives Wcstmacott recalls that `In executing this statue I 
had overlooked a pecuharity, and it brought on me a reproof 
from her Mother on sccing the model, she said it was not 
her Daughter, on asking an explanation it appeared I had not 
noticed a lock of hair on her forehead, which was separated 
from the mass, and passed over it. It was the badge of her 
Tribe. The work was only in clay, and my modelling stick 
corrected the oversight in a moment, and the old Mother and 
I became good ffiends.' Family papers at Orchard Wyndham 
reveal that Westmacott sold antique marbles and vases to the 
fourth earl of Egremont during the 1830s when he was tr}ing 
to crcatc at Silvcrton a gauery to rival that at Pctworth created 
by previous earls, a gallery which he had not inherited with 
the title. 
183
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
184 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Joseph WILLEMS (d. 1766) 
593 and 594. Lady and gentleman 
dancing 
31.2 cms. (height of male figure (593) including plinth); I.3 cms. 
(height of plinth); 10.7 cms. (length of plinth); 9.I cms. (width 
of plinth); 30.6 cms. (height of female figure (594) including 
plinth); I.3 cms. (height of plinth); 11.I cms. (length of plinth); 
10.6 cms. (width of plinth) 
Terracotta of a rich orange colour painted in oil colours. The colours 
have held well: both faces retaining some rose in the cheeks. The 
|ady's blue ribbon matches the gcntleman's waistcoat. The prevailing 
colour is of slightly green grey stone. The paint has crazed and 
wrinkled extensively and flaked off in some areas to reveal a pale 
ycllowed gesso preparation in some cases and in others the clay 
itself. There are traces of gilding on the lady's bodice. The lady has 
been hollowed but the aperture in the underside of the plinth has 
been smeared over so as to be considerably smaller than the hollow. 
The gentleman is of similar weight but if hc has bccn hollowed 
(which is likely) then the plinth has been built up afterwards. Thcrc 
is a break through the man's left thigh and the contiguous corner of 
his jacket. Chips are missing from his right sleeve and from the back 
corner of his tricom hat. There is a break through the lady's neck 
and the plaster repair of this is evident. There is also a break across 
the front left corner of the plinth. `WILLEMs 1749' in large irregular 
capitals is incised on the proper left face of both plinths, the date in 
the case of the male figure running on to the chamfered corner. 
The letters arc angular (the `W', typically, composed of two `V's). 
They have no burr and the clay surface sccms not to have risen in 
response to the downward pressure of the strokes. They must have 
bccn cut in the leather-hard clay. 
Given by the dealer Cyril da Costa Andradc of Morocco House, 
Bayard's Cove, nr. Dartmouth, Devon. Redstered (as `Figures of 
Actor and Actress') on 12 May 1959. A note in the RCSster records 
their acquisition for 165 guineas from the collection of `Fred Skull, 
High Wycombc' with the refcrcnce Christie's, 234 April 1952, lot 
78. For other gifts by Andrade see Nos. 457, 487, and 570. The 
figures seem always to have been displayed in the Chambers Hall 
Room. 
Willems is described in his own will as born in Brussels but 
at what date is unknown. Hc married in Tournai in 1739 so 
he is likely to have been born before 1720. He is known to 
have worked as a modeller at the Chelsea porcelain factory 
of Nicolas Sprimont and it is tempting to associate him with 
the commencement of an interest in figurative models taken 
by that factory after 1749 (when Sprimont's partner Gouyn 
retired) or at least with the estabhshment of a `house style' 
in modelling after about 1753. The evidence of his association 
with Chelsca cannot, however, be documented previous to 
1755-8 when `Williams' and Sprimont were mentioned 
together in the Chelsea rate books as tenants of a house thcrc. 
In 1763 hc is recorded-this time correctly spelt `Willems'- 
in „o7f¢.owG7'f U„¢.pGr£4r/ D¢.rccfory ((I.ondon, 1763), i. 19) 
as `Modellcr at the Brussels Coffcc House, Chelsea' where hc 
taught drawing and modeuing, with the note that `he has 
modelled for the Chelsea china factory for many years'. It 
seems reasonable to identify him with the Williams who 
exhibited at the Society of Artists between 1761 and 1766, 
not least because some of his works (for example, `A model 
of Leda' and `A figure of cleo [Clio]' in 1763) were subjects 
treated in porcelain. He left Enaland soon after February 1766, 
invited to the Tournal porcelain factory by its director, and 
died in Toumal on I November. The posthumous inventory 
of his effects included `plusicurs grouppes de rondc bosse de 
terre cuite et color6cs cn blanc de sa composition et par lui 
modcl€es'. (A. I.ane, `Chclsca Porcelain Figures and the 
Modeller Joseph Willcms', Co„"o¢.ffc#r (May 1960), 245- 
51.) 
From the above account the importance of the signed 
models in the Ashmolean is clear. `Hitherto wc have not been 
able to confirm Willems's presence in England, or at Chelsea, 
before 1755. But an important document has now come to 
light in the form of two terracotta figurcs', wrote Arthur 
Lane. `We cannot say for certain whcthcr the artist made 
them here, or brought them with him ready-made from 
abroad. But we may presume that Willems must by then 
[ 1749] have reached Enaland, and been available for 
employment by his fellow-countryman Sprimont at the very 
moment when the Chelsea factory embarked on its new 
programme of making figures' (ibid. 248). I.one proceeded 
to point out the affinities in style between the figures and 
those in Chelsea porcelain. No figures in porcelain correspond 
in pose but there are a number which are not dissimilar, 
although more ornamental in colouring and accessories and 
in the handling of the extrcmitics. Those in the so-called 
Maypole group are particularly close (an example is on loan 
to the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge 85-1955). 
There is no reason to suspect the antiquity of the terracotta 
dancers. Some at least of the colour is untikely to be origival 
(it covers chips which are unlikely to be kiln losscs). The 
cream underpainting may well correspond with the `blanc' 
finish mentioned in the artist's inventory. It should be 
observed, though, that the signatures and dates are 
suspiciously convenient in that they turn the figures into 
exactly the `document' porcelain historians wanted. The form 
and size of the letters and style of the sigmturc (with no f or 
fecit) are unusual in the eighteenth century. 
A sample was taken fi-om the female figure by Mrs Dorcen 
Stoneham of the Research Laboratory for Art and 
Archaeology in March 1987 and thermo-luminescencc tests 
suggcstcd a firing date between 1677 and 1787 (ref. 38l-z-
90). 
185
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
h,,",#:,,..,,,i,,:ife'':i,; 
fry,i,;'#|ki#ELrEiir,,,'`'';j!#,`;###r'``'T:T''`':'i':;.I:'':''lffi 
.r,t+;,.,..::F:'+iifeife:'#': 
;,i:£±-,.:.f;:ii:,,.`':tii,*,,,,,,lj,,"''"i..",,,;`:ffi##,,1!!, 
I-,T--.I:+ 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
[Francis] Dcrwent WOOD ( 1871-1926) 
595. Bust portrait of Mrs Otto 
Gutekunst 
60 cms. (height); 49 cms. (length) 
Carrara marble. `Derwcnt Wood 1915' is chisellcd in small cursive 
letters to proper left of bust in the rough marble area below the 
bosom. The bust was accidentally knocked off its pcdcstal during 
the 1970s and broken clean across the neck. It was repaired 1983- 
4 by David Armitage of the Department of Eastern Art and the join 
is no longer apparent. 
Presented in 1948 by Mrs Otto Gutekunst (then of the Hotel 
Montana, I.ausanne) in memory of her husband. Registered on 
16 December. The bust stood until it was knocked off a pedestal 
behind the door of 4l Beaumont Street. Since restoration it has been 
in basement storage. The bust was given by Mrs Gutckunst together 
with a bronze head of a young boy. For other gifts by her see the 
Preliminary Essay to vol. ii. 
Mrs Gutekunst was the wife of a leading London art dealer 
associated, in the early years of the century, with the firm of 
Colnaghi. Dcrwcnt Wood was much in demand for his 
portrait busts from 1901, when hc was first established in 
I.ondon, until his death. The merging of the off-shoulder 
gown with rough-hewn marble was a motif made popular in 
high-society bust portraiture by Rodin of a kind which Wood 
must have sccn when he was in Paris in 1895 with a Royal 
Academy gold medal travelling scholarship. Notable examples 
of such busts by Rodin of English sitters wee exhibited in 
I.ondon in the early years of the twentieth century-for 
instance, the bust of Mrs Charles Hunter of 1908 (now 
belongivg to the Tate Gallery but on loan to Bethnal Green 
M:userm+-R. AINey , Catalogtte Of the Ta[te Gallery's Collection 
Of Mode1'.n Art other than Works ky British Artists (.hondor\, 
1981 ), 649-50, no. 4116). 
187
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Thomas WOOLNER RA ( 1825-92) 
596. Bust portrait of Thomas 
Combe 
64.9 cms. (height of bust); 25.5 cms. (length of base of bust); 
18 cms. (width of base of bust); 123 cms. (height of pedestal); 
44.2 cms. (length of plinth of pedestal); 37.5 cms (width of plinth 
of pedestal) 
White Carrara marble, brown and grey with ingrained dust. The 
bust and its base are made of a single piece of marble. The surface 
of the marble has been grooved with the toothed chisel at the cutting 
of the chest, textured with smaller chisels around the base and in hair 
and beard, and retains the marks of a rasp all over the flesh. `T. 
wooLNER. SS / £oNDON' is chiselled on the proper left face of the 
base of the bust under the shoulder. `THOMAS CoMBE 1863' is 
chiselled in the shallow recess in the front face of the base. There 
are slots on both side faces of the base which perhaps relate to the 
original support. So too perhaps does the way that the lower part 
of the back face of the base has been roughly chamfered. Since 
coming to the Museum it has been mounted on a pedestal composed 
ofthrce pieces of dingy brown and pink marble with a smoky pattern 
188 
(probably from Devon or Comwall and certainly British) lettered 
in gold with the names and dates of sitter and artist and the name 
of the donor. 
Given by Martha Combe, widow of the sitter, in 1894-before 13 
February when her husband's bequest ( mostly of Pre-Raphaelitc 
paintings) was accepted by Decree of Convocation (4»"#¢/ RGPo7? 
Of the Curators Of. the Unil7ersity Galleries, \894).1r\ \896 tine 
northern end of the Great Gallery was separated off by screens and 
the bust set up there with the Pre-Raphaelite paintings. This was 
made into a proper room, named the Combe Room, in 1909. The 
bust has been in storage in recent dccadcs, but was placed in the 
new Combe Gallery in 1988. 
Thomas Combe ( 1787-1872), one of the earnest patrons of 
the Pre-Raphaelitcs, with whom Woolner was associated, was 
Printer to the University from 1838, a keen supporter of the 
Hich Church Movcmcnt, and a zealous builder of schools 
and churches. The bust was exhibited at the Royal Academy 
in 1864 (no.1024, `Mr. Combe, of the Clarendon Press'). 
The very solid base, lively texturing, and avoidance of polish, 
and the acceptance of modern dress, are characteristic of 
Woolner's bust portraiture generally. 
-`.. 
'`!. - 
- ngh ` 
Rap \to`' 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Thomas WOOLNER RA ( 1825-92 ) 
597. Bust portrait of william Ewart 
Gladstone on a pedestal decorated 
with scenes from the JJ¢.¢d 
65.6 cms. (height of bust); 26 cms. (length of base of bust); 
19.8 cms. (width of base of bust); 143.8 cms. (height of pedestal); 
45.5 cms. (length of plinth of pedestal); 41.6cms. (width of plinth 
of pedestal) 
White Ca.mra marble, brown and grey with ingrained dust. There 
is a small dark grey flaw in the marble on the chest. The bust and 
its base are made of a single piece of marble and are supported on 
a pedestal composed of two pieces of marble (the plinth is separate). 
There arc chips missing from the uppermost moulding of the pcdcstal 
and at the junction of the two pieces of which the plinth is made. 
The surface of the marble has been left grooved with a toothed 
chisel (on the cutting of the chest and under the relief on the front 
face of the pedestal) and has been less obviously textured with smaller 
chisels (for example on the base of the bust and in parts of the reliefs 
on the pedestal). On close inspection the marks of the rasp have 
seldom been polished off. `WO0LNER. S€ / LONDON. J866' is chisellcd 
on the proper right face of the base of the bust under the shoulder 
(the second line in capitalized italics). `wlLLIAM EWART GIADSTONE' 
is chisellcd within the shallow smooth recess on the front face of the 
base. 
Transferred, together with the bust of the duke of Marlborough 
(No. 566), by the Curators of the Bodleian hibrary in 1926 (14„»#¢/ 
Rcpo7t ( 1926), 24), from the Picture Gallery of the Bodleian Library 
to which it had been presented in 1866 by subscribers (W. D. 
Macray,14#„¢/f a/£f7G Bod/G¢.¢„ L!.4r¢ry (Oxford, 1890), 481 ). By 
\93L (Summary Gttide to t;he Department Of Fine Art. 47) it stood 
in the centre of the Combe Room companion with the bust of 
Combe (No. 596). It was in storage in recent decades but was 
placed in the new Combe Gallery in 1988. 
The portrait bust, which is of similar form to that of Combc, 
dated 1863 (596), is dated 1866, but the pedestal may date 
from a little later. Although obviously designed for the bust, 
the pedestal is not a perfect fit for it. `Reliefs from the Iliad. 
Pedestal of the bust of the Rt. Hon. W. E. Gladstonc, 
executed for the Bodleian Ganery, Oxford' was cxhibitcd by 
Woolncr at the Royal Academy in 1868 (no. 1027) and it 
would be surprising if hc had in fact completed it two years 
before. The reliefs were no doubt felt to be appropriate given 
Gladstone's interest, as translator and scholar, in Homer's 
epic. They were the first classical ones which Woolncr had 
exhibited at the Royal Academy and coincided with an interest 
in such subjects by the Pre-Raphaelitc painters. On the front 
face is carved `Achilles shouting from the trenches with Pallas 
Athena standing by his side', on the proper left face `Thetis 
rising from the water to console Achilles', and, on the proper 
right, `Thetis praying to Jupiter on behalf of Achilles'. 
Woolner was partial to embehishing pedestals with subsidiary 
reliefs (as in his design for a memorial to Wordsworth 
exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1852 with a copious 
description in the catalogue, and as in 777c Lo#¢'f P7i¢ycr at 
Wallingford, Northumberland, of 1856nd7). Woolner had 
worked in Oxford during the 1850s carving the relief (of 
Adam and Eve and the angel holding a nucleating cell, a work 
designed by James Hungerford Pollen ) over the main entrance 
of the University Museum, and a statue of Francis Bacon for 
the series of great scientists in the interior of the Museum. In 
1864 his statue of the prince consort was presented to the 
Museum by the citizens of Oxford and he exhibited his bust 
of Thomas Combe (No. 596). 
A rephica of the bust of Gladstone was completed for the 
Guildhall, I.ondon, in October 1882 made out of marble 
from the Parian quarries in Greece and reproductions in 
bronze by the firm of Elkington arc recorded (A. Woolner, 
Thomas Woolner: His Life in Imer§ (.hondon, L9\7), g22, 
n. 2; Sothcby's, Bclgravia, 8 Scptcmbcr 1976, lot 18). A note 
of 19 June 1969 by Ian I.owe in the Departmcnt's files records 
a plaster cast of the bust in the University Press Offices. 
189
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
air j!1+ 
(i 
190 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Joseph Shepherd WYON ( 1836-73) 
598. Medallion profile head of 
HRH Alexandra, princess of Wales 
22.5 cms. (diameter of marble roundel as visible in its frame); 
32.5 cms. (height and width of outside of frame) 
White Carrara marble. The relief ground is textured with short 
regular hatched strokes crossing at an acute angle. `ALEXANDRA' is 
chisellcd in very fine, very widely spaced letters around the upper 
half circumference. `|. s. wVoN. SC.' is chisellcd in a diagonal line 
across the cutting of the neck. The medallion is set in a square ctlt 
wooden frame (almost certainly original) with a simple outer 
moulding and the spandrels showing the texture of the oak under 
the water-gilding with small round geometrical ornaments in each 
corner (t\ro patterns arc used, paired on the diagonal). 
Given by Mrs A. W. Fuller of Sheen House, 89 Himner I.one, 
Felpham, Sussex, in 1972. Rcdstered on 24 November. In reserve 
save for occasional exhibition until 1988 when placed in the newly 
refurbished Combc Gallery. 
The artist came from the family of medallists, die-cutters, and 
wax modellers which dominated the productions of the 
I.ondon Mint throughout the last century. He was the cldcst 
son of Benjamin Wyon ( 1802-58) who was appointed Chief 
Engraver of seals in 1831, the nephew of Thomas Wyon 
Junior ( 1792-1817) who was appointed Chief Engraver of 
the Royal Mint in 1815, and of Edward Williani Wyon ( 1811- 
1885) the sculptor, and he was grandson of Thomas Wyon 
( 1767-1830), appointed Chief Engraver of Seals in 1816. 
Joseph Shepherd Wyon was himself chiefly known as a 
medallist and was appointed Chief Engraver of Her Majcsty's 
Seals in 1858. Hc commenced exhibiting at the Royal 
Academy in 1855 but the first and only work of his specified 
as of marble to be shown there was no. 874 in 1864- 
`H.R.H. The Princess ofwales'-presumably to be identified 
with this medallion (or another version of it). The relief 
lettering and the idiosyncratic tcxturing of the ground reflect 
his cxperiencc working in metal. 
191
SCULPTURES OF THE BRITISH SCHOOL 
Unassociated with a Named Artist, Craftsman, or Supplier
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
599. Bust portrait of King 
Heny VIII 
67.5 cms. (height excluding plinth); 64.5 cms. (length); 17.7cms. 
(height of plinth); 30.5 cms, (length of plinth); 30 cms. (width 
of plinth) 
White (probably Carrara) marble, discolourcd with ingrained dirt 
and abraded. Broken in two from the king's left shoulder down to 
the other side of his chest and crudely cemented together, with 
patches of plaster in fill to proper right of the pendant medal. The 
reverse of the bust is only slightly hollowed and is roughly hewn on 
the back of both cap and collar. The bust is mounted on a plain 
block of limestone unmoulded but with a large chamfer. 
Given to Oxford University by the dowager countess of Pomfret in 
1755. The collection included a large part of the `Arundel marbles', 
bought by her father-in-law Sir William Femor (later I.ord 
Lempster) from the sixth duke of Norfolk in 1691, and it is likely, 
but not certain, that this was one of them and was therefore acquired 
by the earl of Anmdel in the first half of the seventeenth century. 
The bust is recorded, perched on a high shelf at the far cnd of the 
sculpture gallery in the Old Schools, companion with Dieussart's 
bust of Prince Rupert (No. 471 ), in William Westall's watercolour 
drawing of 1813 (engraved in the following year for R Ackermann's 
A History Of` the University Of O>ifiord). It was cranstened to tine 
University Galleries where it is recorded in the H¢#dfoo4 G#¢.de of 
1859 in the Crypt or sub-gallery but visible to the public (p. 19, 
no. 59). It is not recorded in any guide made in this century and 
must have bccn put into store in the l880s or l890s. It was identified 
serving as a doorstop in the Museum basements in 1979 by Michael 
Vickers and was placed in the Randolph Gallery. 
The marble bust is a coarse copy of the somewhat routine 
bust of King Henry VIII at Lumley Castle which was already 
recorded there in 1590 upon one `front' of the Great Hall, 
in company with three others-`four livelie statues all 
wrought in white marble in memory of K. Henry the 8, King 
Edward 6, Qucne Marie and Q. Elizabeth'. These were the 
monarchs in whose reigns John, I.ord Lumley, lived. The four 
busts were made for Lumley in Florence in 1566 by an 
unknown sculptor employing medallic prototypes. The medal 
of Henry VIII would sccm to have been derived from one 
of Holbein's portraits. Michael Vickers, having made these 
connections, also pointed out the existence of a copy of the 
Lumley Castle Q;"cc» E/¢.z¢Gcff7 together with a companion 
bust of the earl of Leiccster in a private collection in I.ondon 
(both having come from Kimbolton Castle). The bust of I.ord 
Leicester (which he also shows to have derived ultimately 
from a medallic prototype) is, he supposes, also a copy of 
another marble bust which, he suggests, was once among the 
set at Lumley Castle. If so it must have been extracted from 
there by 1590 when the inventory mcntioncd above was 
made. Vickers argues that the copy of the bust of Leicester, 
and hence the other copies, including this one of Henry VIII, 
must have been made before the `disappcarancc' of the origival 
hypothetical bust of Leicester in 1590. There is much that is 
conjectural in this, but it is certainly true that `given Arundcl's 
interest in the Henrician Court, and in the art of Holbein in 
particular . . . it is cary to see why he should have owned the 
bust now in Oxford', although it should be added that it 
would be surprising if so great a connoisseur did not regret 
that this work was of such dismal quality. (M. Vickers, `The 
Changivg Face of Henry VIII', Co#„#)i LGrc (24 April 1980), 
1248-9; id., `The Medal of Robert Dudley, Earl of I.cicestcr 
in the Bibliotheque Nationale', N#owG.fee¢fS.c C47it7»G.c/G, 141 
(1981),117-19.) 
195
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
600. Court cupboard with a lion 
and unicorn sejant, a pair of atlantes, 
and a pair of griffins as supporters 
127 cms. (height); 128.8 cms. (length); 47.5 cms. (width); 
38.8 cms. (height of lion); 38.9 cms. (height of unicorn); 
43.5 cms. (height of griffins) 
Chiefly of oak and walnut. The carcass is of oak. Each supporter is 
made from a separate block of walnut. There is a geometric veneer 
of holly and sycamore with mahogany and burr walnut in the 
uppermost ffieze (part of which is also a drawer front). There is 
also inlay of holly and sycamore and bog oak in the ccntra.I and lower 
boards. The eyes of the animals are inlaid with bog oak (or an 
imitation of it). The carvings are in places encrusted with darkened 
deposits of polish. The shield and crown held by the lion are 
chipped, partly because of worm damage. The proper left griffin's 
left wing is missing and its other wing has split but been reattached. 
The tat of the same griffin is loose. `1606' is carved in large letters 
on the back of the uppermost ffieze. The upper board is a restoration 
as are the back and the base with the bun fcct and there is evidence 
of other repairs and perhaps of reconstruction (see below). A bluc-bordercd 
paper label, on the top of the back of the principal upright 
member, proper left, of the cupboard, is inscribed `w. E. MALLETr' 
in black ink. 
Given, together with fiftccn other pieces of furniture and some 
pieces of tapestry and needlework, by Miss Elizabeth Mallett in 
1961 in memory of her parents Margaret (who died on 15 May 
1959) and J. Francis Mallett (who died on 7 January 1947)-the 
latter was a notable benefactor of the Museum. Redstered on 21 
September. Previously in the collection of J. F. Mallett who had, 
presumably, inherited it from his father-in-law and uncle William 
Mallett-the W. E. Mallett of the label-n antique dealer in the 
Octagon, Bath. According to the museum's ReSster it came in 1903 
from Boume Place, now Compton Place, Bexley, Sussex. 
The `court cupboard' was the term employed in Elizabethan 
and Jacobean inventories for an open three-tiered `buffct' or 
`dresser'. `Court' came from the French for short, and 
`cupboard' meant a shelf for cups. They were used to display 
plate and also for serving. The shelves were covered with 
carpet or some rich textile; the drawers contained knives and 
spoons. There is an exceuent discussion of the type in Ralph 
Edwalds' s Dictionary Of English Fttrmitwre, 3 vo\s. (London, 
1954), ii. 177-83. Most examples have decorated bulbous 
supports but supporters in the form of heraldic or 
mythologival beasts are not unusual. Few, however, are as 
vigorously charactcrizcd as those on the Ashmolcan's 
`cupboard' which was singlcd out as of exceptional quality in 
Edwards's book (where it is fig.Ill on p.183) and was also 
included in the Royal Academy's exhibition of British Art in 
1934 (no.1267, illustrated as pl. 31 in the catalogue). The 
shields with the English rose and Scottish thistle place it after 
the accession of King James I in 1603. It is also said to be 
dated, although the first diSt of the `1606' must be an 
addition and the `606' may have been an inventory number. 
The Ashmolean's `cupboard' has also certainly been 
restored and it cannot be assumed that it docs not incorporate 
items from at least one other source. The atlantes which serve 
196 
as supporters behind the lion and unicoriLcannot have been 
oriSnally intended to overlap the ornamental edge of the 
board upon which they rest. Neither the lion, nor the unicorn, 
nor either griffin, make satisfactory contact with the frieze 
above their heads: the lion's head has been made up at the top 
with wax (or some similar substance), and the unicorn's head 
appears to have been slightly cut down. 
Among other similar `cupboards' that in the Victoria and 
Albert Museuni is particularly close (but has a cherub in place 
of the hon mask in the centre of the central frieze and cherubs 
in place of the male and female masks in the upper friczc 
corner, also marble inlay in the upper frieze and caryatids in 
place of atlantcs). The lion, unicorn, and griffins, however, 
in that example have a sharpness in their carving which those 
in the Ashmolean's cupboard lack. A similar `cupboard' in 
the Burrell Collection ( 14/432) fomcrly in Brandeston Hall 
has fine lion supporters which, it is interesting to note, do 
not fit any more neatly than those here. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
197
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
601. Four Ionic pilasters decorated 
with caryatids attached to a pier 
62 cms. (height of each); 86.5 cms. (height of table to which they 
are attached) 
Oak. 
Provenance unknown. 
The four pilasters are attached to the central octagonal pier 
support of an octagonal oak table with one disguised drawer 
in the gadrooned frieze. The table serves to support a case 
displaying some of Fortnum's collection of rings. It was 
assembled in the Museum's workshop for this purpose. Such 
pilaster carvings could easily have been detached from 
damaged or cumbersome items of furniture but they survive 
in suspicious quantities. These examples look like ninetccnth-century 
imitations of Elizabethan or Jacobean carving, but 
might be genuine. Fortnum owned a couple of pilasters of 
similar character (but male and female whereas these are 
sexless) which he acquired from Pugiv. Hc had them `picked 
out with Slding and mounted as pilasters to support a cornice 
and form a frame to a looking glass' (prelininary catalogue 
(1857), 70, nos. 8 and 9, and visible in photographs of his 
house). 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
602. Centre table with scrolled legs 
terminating in female heads 
supporting cushions 
73.5 cms. (height of table); 9 cms. (height of each head); 97 cms. 
(length of table top); 61 cms. (width of table top) 
Walnut. The legs and feet only are of solid walnut. The top, sides, 
and stretchers are of walnut veneered on a carcass of pine. The 
seaweed marquetry of the table top and sides is of walnut on a 
ground of sycamore. The moulded edge of the table top is veneered 
in cross-grain walnut. A piece of walnut has been added to each of 
the four heads at the top of the legs (the join can be seen in the 
proper left cheeks). The tasselled cushions arc carved out of separate 
blocks of walnut. Much of the wood is bleached; there are also 
cracks, stains, and scratches and some of the veneer has lifted. The 
drawer has been repaired. A circular paper label with a fringed 
border with the number 1113 in ink on it is stuck on the underside 
of the table top. 
Given to the Museum in 1958 (registered 18 June) from the 
collection of J. Francis Mallett and as part of his bequest which 
came to the Museum in May 1947-in advance of the gift of further 
items of furniture made by Miss Ehizabeth Mallett in 1961 in 
memory of her parents. 
The marquetry is of a pattern popular in British finniture 
around 1700, but the beauty of the heads with the ropes of 
pearls in their hair is remarkable. There is an echo here of the 
silver furniture of the period such as the silver table with 
harpy legs made for King Charles 11 and now at Windsor 
Castle. Similar but larger female heads were popular in 
furniture made in about 1730 such as the term piers in the 
Queen's Guard Chamber at Hampton Court. A side table in 
the Fitzwillian Museum, Cambridge (M4-196l ) which has 
both scrolled legs and heads of an antique character may be 
regarded as a rich and bold descendant of this one. 
IncludedinMissMallett'sgiftof1961wasalowboycabinet 
of seaweed marquetry of the same period and a chest of 
drawers of floral marquetry of great richness on corkscrew 
legs (see Appendix 2 to this volunc). 
199
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
603. Relief bust portrait ofa Knight 
of the Garter 
54 cms. (height); 48.4 cms. (width) 
White Carrara marble, somewhat discoloured from ingrained dirt. 
The rim has been chipped below the chest. 
Provenance unrecorded. 
The chain worn over the ermine is that of a Knight of the 
Garter. The sitter is hkely to bc one of the great Whig 
magnates of the early eighteenth century but at no other 
period in modern British history have artists made men look 
so alike. It is not, in fact, impossible that King Gcorgc I is 
intended, for he was painted by Hudson in this style (with 
long loose wig forward over one shoulder, lace jabot, garter 
couar over ermine) and hc had a similar jowl and broad nose. 
The mouth however is larger in paindngs and prints of that 
monarch. The carving looks like a copy by an artist of limited 
ability made from a sculptural prototype or, more probably, 
from a two-dimensional portrait. The management of the 
emine collar suggests uncertainty as to the actual nature of 
the garment represented and the truncation of the bust is 
unhappily managed. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
604 and 605. Pair of ewers 
ornamented with garlands, scrolls, 
masks, and fish 
34.4 cms. (height); 10.4 cms. (diameter of feet) 
The vases are composed of pieces of C¢¢.//o#Jc d'Eg¢.#o, a rare jasper 
of the colour of coffee into which cream has been partially stirred, 
figured in the paler bands with miniature branched black lines. 
(For samples of this stone see the display in the Museo dell'Opificio 
delle Pictre Dure in Florence, Row G, 421nd, also A. 97 in the 
appendix of A. M. Giusti, P. Mazzoni, A.-P. Pampaloni Martclli, JJ 
Mu§eo dell'Opificio delle Pietre Dare (`FLorence. \978), afuc[ p. 364.) 
The jasper is mounted in ormolu (fire-Slt copper, rather than 
bronze). The cagework around the body of each vase conceals the 
different pieces of jasper employed. These `cages' are each cast in 
two separate pieces. The cartouches containing masks of Pan (or at 
least a satyr) and masks of a nymph, also the dolphin-like fish, the 
ribbons, and the scrolls which are linked with them around the upper 
shoulder of each vase form one piece: the crossing garlands and the 
divisions of the gadrooned swellings in the lower part of each vase 
form another. The junctions between these pieces are no longer 
perfect. The thinner elements of ormolu have probably been 
embossed before being chiselled. The outer rim of each foot with 
miniature machined cable and guilloche ornament is a Later addition. 
`M. ¥' and `M. ¥' are painted in black on the ctlt copper plates 
beneath the feet. 
Bequeathed by J. Francis Mallett who died 7 January 1947. Received 
in the Museum during the last week in May 1947. No.182 in the 
inventory of his bequest. Valued by Mallctt at £303. Acquired by 
him at the sale of the Folcy Heirlooms, Ruxley I.odge, 1919. In 
one of the ewers I found in 1986 a piece of crumpled paper with 
`HEIRLooM 1869' printed in Gothic letters in a circle. This date 
was crossed through and 1887 written in brown ink above it. This 
in turn was also crossed through and `Baron Foley Ruxley h)dge, 
sold 1919' written above it in blue ink. The ewers had therefore 
belonged to the Foley family before 1869. The ewers were displayed 
in the 1950s but had long been in store when they were put on 
exhibition in the Wcldon Gallery in 1985. 
The basic shape of these ewers-the bold scroll of the handle 
and its fantastic oriSn in a realistic hen's foot clutching a 
shell, also the gadrooning of the body-is reminiscent of 
ornamental plate of the seventeenth century, but the garlands 
and, stu more, the asymmetrical scrolls of the cartouches and 
the rock-work fringe to the mask of a river god below the 
lips, which are all tooled with such finesse, indicate a date in 
the eightccnth century. Mallctt described the ewers as English 
and of c.1740, presumably by analogy with work in silver: 
similar Pan and nymph masks, cartouches, and fish are found, 
for instance, in the four candlesticks made by John Jacob in 
the early 1740s (Ashmolcan Museum, Farrer Collection 114 
(i)-(iv) ) and the somewhat flat garlands are common in 
tableware made by Paul de I.ancrie and others in this period. 
All these motifs, howcvcr, arc of continental origiv. Cagework 
was popular in the middle decades of the cightcenth century, 
especially for gold boxes often in conjunction with a rare 
jasper, or with agate, but on a much smaller scale. Some of 
these boxes were made in I.ondon which again supports the 
idea that these ewers might be English. 
201 
200
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
202 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
606. Bust portrait of a man 
59,.15 cms. (height) 
Limestone thickly coated with shellac and paint perhaps intended to 
resemble bronze. The crust of these coverings has flaked off on the 
lips, the end of the nose, the top of the forehead, and on some 
salient curls of the wig. A portion of the stone has broken away to 
proper right and only a part of this has been refixed. The stone has 
only been slightly hollowed behind. 
Provenance unrecordcd. 
The stone would appear to be deteriorating and the coatings 
may have been intended to arrest its crunbhng: they certainly 
eliminate the little surface intcrcst that the bust is likely to 
have posscsscd. The bands and gown suggest a portrait of 
an academic and the bust may well have come from a local 
church-perhaps from a dilapidated monument. It is similar 
to the busts on many carly eighteenth-century monuments in 
Oxford. 
607. High-relief bust portrait of 
rig James 11 
15.2 cms. (height of bust); 20.6 cms. (height of visible relief); 
18 cms. (width of visible relief); 28 cms. (height of shadow box); 
24.5 cms. (width of shadow box); 25.5 cms. (height of class 
support); 21.8 cms. (width of glass support) 
The bust is of coloured wax, slightly hollow. It has come loose from 
its glass support (but has been photographed in place). The support 
is painted with thin coloured wax and also built up in low relief. 
There is a dent and crack to the end of the nose which has also lost 
its colour. A portion of one of the low-relief curtain ropes has been 
lost. The thin wax of the sky has crinkled perhaps from heat. The 
support is set within a deep tray frame of pine stained black. This is 
probably original, and is enclosed in a shadow box (not 
photographed) of the same date, also of pine stained black, with 
glossy black paint around an oval aperture. `RING JAMES 11' has been 
written at a later date in gold letters on the lower part of the glass. 
On the backboard there is an old deteriorating paper label inscribed 
`3474.1887' in ink. The number is repeated in pencil with a note 
also in pencil in the hand of C. F. Bell (see below). 
Presumably transferred to the University Galleries in 1887 ( see 
above) perhaps from the Bodleian Library or the old Ashmolean 
Museum. 
The note by C. F. Bell on the backboard is that `At Sudeley 
Castle, Gloucestershire there are a number of wax portraits 
precisely similar in style to the present. The fact that some of 
these represent personages of the late XVIII century period 
shows that this work also is of that date.' The portrait may 
also be compared with those of Mary and Agncs Berry in the 
Victoria and Albert Museum attributed to Samuel Percy who 
died in 1820 (A. 13 and A. 14-1970). The wax may well bc 
carlicr in date: these comparisons may only indicate the 
durability of conventions and techniques, but the franc and 
shadow box look original and arc typical of the late eighteenth 
century: in particular the dosry black paint on the glass was 
popular at that date especially for framing prints. 
203
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
204 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
608. Urn with vine tendril handles 
34.3 cms. (height); 19.2 cms. (width, across handles); 17.2 cms. 
(height of handles); I.85 cms. (diameter of plinth) 
The urn is composed of three pieces of Derbyshire fluorspar (blue-john) 
each of which, to judge by the weight, is solid. The pieces, 
which arc securely fixed, consist of the concave tapering lid; a disc 
immediately below it, separated by a thin collar of moulding; and the 
main body of the urn. The base, handles, finial, and other ornaments 
are all of bronze, fire-gilded. The base consists of three separately 
worked elements: plinth, foot, and acanthus. Each handle is of a 
single piece. 
Bequeathed by Major T. Bouch, 1963. Received by the Museum 
on 20 November 1963. For more on the bequest see Nos. 451, 
452, 469. Lent to the City Art Museum, Derby, on 27 May 1981. 
The workmanship and design of this urn are of superlative 
quality: the minute punched texturing of the bay, acanthus, 
and vine leaves is as fine as their modelling is crisp. In style it 
resembles the best work known to have been produced at the 
Soho factory near Birmingham in the early 1770s. This factory, 
cstablishcd in 1762 by Matthew Boulton in partnership with 
John Fothergill, made many varieties of hardware but began 
in 1768 to specialize in ormolu. In that same year Boulton 
began looking for attractive vase bodies. He toyed with the 
idea of porcelain oncs, but in 1768 he was actively acquiring 
blue-john and in the following spring he acquired 14 tons of 
it. The stone was at first worked at Soho but was later supplied 
in the form required by local Derbyshire craftsmen (N. 
Goodison. Ormoltt: The Work Of Matthew? Bot4lton (-hondon, 
1974), 25, 27, 29-30, 75nd). An idea of the factory's goods 
in `radix amethysti' (as the stone was pretentiously marketed) 
and `or moulu' during the first years of production may be 
obtained from the large sale held 11-13 April 1771 at 
Christic's. It is clear from another large sale held at Christie's 
in May 1778 that the basic range of products had not changed 
(ibid., Appendix IV, pp. 242nd8). Production diminished 
thereafter and ceased in the 1780s. Most of their vases were 
`candle vases', that is fitted with branches for candles, or were 
`essencc pots' (perfume burners) or `sugar dishcs'. No vase 
made by them has exactly the form of handle or finial or shape 
of plinth found in the Ashmolean's exanplc. The fact that 
the material is English suggests that the vase was made in 
England by one of Boulton's rivals or successors. It is not 
impossible that it was made in France, but it should be pointed 
out that there is no evidence to support the claim that the 
French were the first to exploit bluciohn extensively for high-quality 
omanental work and very httle evidence that they used 
the material at all. Had they been employing it in the 1760s 
Boulton would surely have mentioned the fact. The only 
reference known to me to what must be blue-john in a French 
collection is the `coupe avcc son pied de spath fluor 
d'Angleterre, rubann€e blanc, rouge et violet; unc autrc idem, 
forme de gobclct a pied, avec une arse et bordurc cn or, la 
cuillere de memc, un petit seau aussi dc spath fluor violet ct 
blanc avec son ansc et cuillere cn argcnt' recorded in the 
collection of Queen Marie-Antoinettc in 1789 (A. Tuetey, 
`Invcntairc des laques anciennes ct des objets de curiosit€ de 
Ma]ie-An:toin€tte' , Nowelles Archives de l'art fhan§ais 
( 1916), 286-319). But Maric-Antoinette was an avid 
collector of rarities and these might have been sent from 
England. The claim is made by Francis Watson in his 
catalogue of the furniture in the Wanacc Collection of 1956 
that a pair of vases and a ewer (F345, 346, 347), and a pair 
of candelabra (F158 and 159) are examples of blue-john 
mounted in eighteenth-century France. The candelabra are 
not of blue-john (and may also be English and indeed 
ninetccnth century). The ewer (F345) is a pastiche, 
combining in an unconvincing manner an carly eighteenth-century 
shape with late eighteenth-century French ornaments 
in a manner typical of the ninctcenth-century English makers 
and docs not really belong with the vases. The vases (F346 
and 347) have extensively restored bodies, including portions 
of painted plaster, and the mounts may well bc additions or 
restorations of the same period-in any case there is no proof 
that they arc French. More significant is a blue-john urn 
band-clock with a French movcmcnt in the Fitzwilliam 
Museum, Cambridge ( 10-1948).>+\, ij'firiffriELi:`fy 
205
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTISTS NAME 
609. Urn with handles a la grecque 
32.5 cms. (height); 20.5 cms. (width, across handles); 10.8 cms. 
(length and width of plinth) 
The urn is composed of two pieces of Derbyshire fluorspar (blue-john)-
the body and the lid with its concave neck-ach of which, 
to judge by the weight, is solid. They are securely fixed, the join 
reinforced by the handles which are, together with the base and finial, 
of bronze, fire-gilded. The plinth of the base is separately worked. 
A large F and `N 4/ 0 / i 3 pieces' is written in ink on a piece of 
wood jammed inside the phnth. 
Bequeathed by Major T. Bouch, 1963. Received by the Museum 
on 20 November 1963. For more on the bequest see Nos. 451, 
452, 469, 608. Lent to the City Art Museum, Derby, on 27 May 
1981. 
The workmanship and design of this urn are of very high 
quality. In style it is comparable with the work known to 
206 
have been produced at Boulton's Soho factory in the early 
1770s (for which scc No. 608). The relatively large size of 
the handles, slender foot, and sharp water-leaf ornament of 
the foot is reminiscent of some of the designs favoured by 
Boulton and the angular style of handle is found on a type of 
branched candle vase made at Soho. The details, however, 
cannot be exactly matched in any documented work by 
Boulton's factory. It was probably, like No. 608, made by a 
rival English firm. It is not impossible that the urn was made 
in France: certainly the blue-john urn band-clock with a 
French movement in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge 
( 10-1948 ) has very similar handles. 
The fluorspar employed for this urn is of a very unusual 
character: consistent alike in colour and texture, resembling 
a yellow melon, but with one band (about 6 cms. in width) 
of deep mauve passing down one side of the body. The band 
is also featured on the lid, where it is not quite aligned, which 
shows that this was cut from the same lump of fluorspar. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTISTS NAME 
610 and 611. A pair of vase 
candlesticks on tripod supports 
(only one traced) 
19.3 cms. (height); 10.1 cms. (diameter of plinth) 
Each leg of the tripod is cast in bronze with a dark brown patina. 
The `egg' supported and the plinth and part of the lid are of white 
Carrara marble. The egg is partially hollowed. The other elements 
are all of fire-allt bronze or copper, some of it machined. The 
marble part of the lid has been shattered but only chips are missing. 
The cover reverses to form a nozzle. `B.-39.e' is painted in black 
around the rim of the marble `egg' concealed by the lid. `FORTNUM 
8' is faintly scratched on the upper surface of the plinth. 
Bequeathed by Charles Drury Fortnum in 1899 as a pair (mos. 8. 
1038 and 1039 in his large manuscript catalogue). Noted by him 
as a gift from Mrs F. W. Hope. The loss of the companion candlestick 
(611 ) was not recorded before work commenced on this catalogue 
(in 1986). 
Fortnum owned a similar pair of candlesticks (nos. 1040 and 
1041 in his large manuscript catalogue) which were not 
included in his bequest. An exceptional miniature pair of 
ceramic candlesticks of similar character were included in the 
bequest to the Ashmolcan Museum of J. Francis Mallett 
(Nos. 266, 267). 
The type and size of candlestick arc not uncommon, but 
there are numerous variations. The `cggs' can be of dark 
patinated bronze with ormolu leaves (Christie's, I.ondon, 6 
November 1986, lot 63, or Christie's, New York, 25 October 
1986, lot 30). The central support below the `egg' can have 
a snake twisted around it (Christie's, Orchardleich Park, 
Somerset, 21-2 September 1987, lot 406). The chains here 
suspended from the goats' heads in the frieze on top of the 
`egg' sometimes take the form of beads-and hang either 
from simple studs or from the goats' heads on top of the legs 
or from both. Also, the mouldings are often varied as are the 
areas of patinated or art bronze. In some models on the 
continent (for instance the pair in the Six Huis iinsterdam) 
the cap is topped with Slt bronze roses forming nozzles. 
The popularity of this type of candlestick in England is 
sufficient to justify the assumption that they were made 
here-an assumption found in auction catalogues where they 
are generally described as `Gcorge 111'. They may well have 
been imitated later in the nineteenth century. They reflect a 
fashion for slender tripods, miniature animal heads, spiral 
snakes, dchicate branches, and pendant chains and beads 
created by the leading French bronziers such as Gouthiere 
and Pierre-Phhippe Thomire in the 1780s and associated with 
`le gout etrusque'. These fragle open forms of the metalwork 
and the minimal support they provided were often dramatized 
by a cup or `cgg' of marble or of a semi-precious stone (or 
of a ceramic imitation of one or the other). Splendid and 
elaborate exanplcs, which may be considered as distant royal 
relatives of the Ashmolcan's candlesticks, arc the tripod 
candelabra with a lapis `egg' in the Wallace Collection (F 
132 ) or the vase with tripod stand in the J. Paul Getty Museum 
(70.DE. I 15), both illustrated, with related pieces, in H. 
Ottomeycr and P. Pr6schel (eds. ), Vc#g7o/defg Bro"2;c„, 2 vols. 
(Munich, 1986), i. 264 and 268. 
EEEE-
2/fJr/
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
612 and 613. Pair of hall tables with 
lotus leaf supports (only one 
illustrated) 
82.5 cms. (height); 112 cms. (length); 75 cms. (width) 
The supporting members are of solid carved walnut. The plinths are 
of richly figured rosewood veneered on to a carcass of pine. The 
upper surface of the plinth is veneered with two figured pieces in a 
symmetrical book-matched pattern. The edges of the table tops are 
of wood, probably pine, gilded and carry applied composition 
omanents, also gilt. The edging of the slabs of porphyry is of 
ormolu. 
Bought at the Stowe sale, 1920. The tables stood in the state drawing 
room at Stowe, 
The tables are likely to date from about 181040 when both 
composition ornament and rosewood veneer were particularly 
popular and the severe sculptural ideals represented by 
furniture such as that of Thomas Hope (see Nos. 522-3) 
were replaced with a gross opulence, well represented by the 
heavy outline of the curves of these supports, the fat rolls of 
208 
the framing mouldings, and the overlapping fleshy lotus leaves 
within them. The `marblc' slabs have been described as 
imperial porphyry, but if so are of an oddly irregular grain 
and brown colour: they are in fact more hkcly to be one of 
the native British stones promoted by George Bullock of 
Liverpool, sculptor, cabinet maker, and entrepreneur ( see 
Nos. 453, 454), who exploited the Mona Marble quarries on 
Anglesey which supplied types of stone said to emulate 
oriental (that is ancient Egyptian `imperial') porphyry and 
77crde ¢7¢£¢.co. Bullock moved to Ijondon in 1813 where the 
Mona Marble works opened its showrooms in 1814 but wen 
bcforc this date he had been supplying wood and ormolu 
furniture, marble chimney-pieces, and artificial stone lamps to 
customers all over Britain. His Anglesey marble is first 
mentioned in 1806 (C. Wainwright (ed. ), GcoffgG B#//ocfe, 
C¢4¢.#cf 44l¢4Gy (I.ondon, 1988), 21-2). Whilst it is possible 
that these tables were made in his workshops there are no 
precise analodes with any furniture documcnted as designed 
by him. The tables were fitted with brass-framed glass cases 
made by the firm of Frederick Sage and Company under the 
Kccpership of C. F. Bell and have retained these ever since. 
They have, it seems, always been used to display bronzes 
from the Fortnum Collection. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
614. Portrait bust of Sir Walter 
Scott 
6.45 cms. (height of bust); 12.4 cms. (diameter of board) 
Bronze with a dark brown patina. Hollow, sand-cast. The cavity 
under the bust has been filled with another metal and filed. The 
bust is mounted on a circular board of pine as if in high relief, but 
the back of the head has in fact been let into the board. `Sir W. Scott' 
is painted crudely in black on the reverse of the board. 
The bronze is kept in the Heberden Coin Room as part of the 
collection of medals purchased in 1953 from Colonel Michael H. 
Grant (whose catalogue lists portraits of scott on p.156). 
The bust appears to be a companion with Nos. 615 and 616. 
615. Portrait bust of King George 
Ill 
6.8 cms. (height of bust); 12.4 cms. (diameter of board) 
Bronze with a dark brown patina with traces of Slding. Hollow, 
sand-cast. The cavity under the bust has been filled with another 
metal and filed. The bust is mounted on a circular board of pine as 
if in high relief, but the back of the head has in fact been let into the 
board. `Geo 111' is painted crudely in black on the reverse of the 
board. 
The bronze is kept in the Hebcrden Coin Room as part of the 
collection of medals purchased in 1953 from Colonel Michael H. 
Grant (whose catalogue lists several anonymous portraits of the king, 
p.180). 
The bust appears to bc a companion with Nos. 614 and 616. 
209
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
616. Portrait bust of King George 
IV 
7.8 cms. (height of bust); 12.4 cms. (diameter of board) 
Bronze with a rusty brown patina and traces of black varnish. 
Hollow, sand-cast. The cavity under the bust has been filled with 
another metal and filed. The bust is mounted on a circular board of 
pine as if in high relief, but the back of the head has in fact been let 
into the board. `Geo IV' is painted crudely in black on the reverse 
of the board. 
The bronze is kept in the Heberden Coin Room as part of the 
collection of medals purchased in 1953 from Colonel Michael H. 
Grant (whose catalogue lists 14 anonymous portraits of the king, 
p.181). 
The bust appears to be a companion with Nos. 614 and 615. 
210 
617. Portrait head in relief of 
Althur Weuesley, lst duke of 
Wellington 
15.5 cms. (height of head); 22.8 cms. (diameter of backplate) 
Bronze with a black vanish worn in some salient parts to brown. 
Heavy sand-cast, open behind. Mounted on a circular plate of steel. 
There is a hole in the top of the back approximately 0.6 cms. square. 
The opening under the cutting of the bust has been filled with copper 
or a very coppery alloy. 
The bronze is kept in the Hebcrden Coin Room as part of the 
collection of medals purchased in 1953 from Colonel Michael H. 
Grant. 
The high rclicf appears to have been created by sawing off the 
back of a thrcc-dimensional head, as also is the case with 
Nos. 475 and 618. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
618. Portrait head in relief of 
William Ewart Gladstone 
12.2 cms. (height of head); 20 cms. (diameter of board) 
Bronze with a black patina, worn to a pale brown in the nose. Heavy 
sand-cast, open behind. Mounted on a circular board of pine. A 
bolt has perforated the wall of the bronze behind the whiskers to 
proper right. The underside of the neck has been filled and coated 
with a black substance. 
The bronze is kept in the Heberden Coin Room as part of the 
collection of medals purchased in 1953 from Colonel Michael H. 
Grant. 
The head is mounted in the same manner as the bust of 
Ruskin by Drcsslcr (No. 475). As in that case and No. 617 
the high relief appears to have been created by sawing off the 
back of a three-dimensional head. 
619. Bust portrait of Captain T. 
Heard 
22.8 cms. (height); 18.9 cms. (width at shoulders); 30.4 cms. 
(length of base); 14.8 cms. (width) 
Opaque white alabaster, mounted on a base of wood painted black 
with gold lines. `Capt. Thos. Heard / R.N. H.M.S. /ACTlvE' and 
`Byron's / 1834 / "Maid of Athens" ' is scratched in amateur letters, 
blackened for emphasis, on the underside of the block resting on the 
base. `oLD BASE FOR/ BUST oF CAPT. T. HEARD / Byron's / "Maid of 
Athens" ' is scratched on the underside of the base with a space 
between the first and second pair of lines. Also some lines in pencil, 
for which see below. 
Provenance unrecorded ( but see below). 
The Byron of the inscription may not be the poet, despite the 
poet's connection with Athens. Captain Heard was evidently 
serving on HMS Acf¢.pc. It may be that the portrait was made 
on the `Maid of Athens'. It is not a distinguished work of 
art. There are two pencil inscriptions on the undcrsidc of the 
base. One certainly reads `Georgc Richmond', the other in 
larger letters seems to read `G . . . yu . . / Br .... &C / 11 
cms high / of Black' . 
211
BRITISH SCULPTURES, UNNAMED ARTISTS 
620. Bust portrait of an unknown 
man in classical attire 
62.8 cms. (height including socle); 11.8 cms. (height of socle); 
18.2 cms. (diameter of socle) 
Plaster of Paris varnished a rich golden brown. Thick-walled, hollow 
cast. There are vestiges of scans on the top of the head. There are 
minor chips to the drapery and the end of the nose. Initials or a 
short name probably followed by `Fecit' were scratched on the top 
of the socle at the back but cannot now bc traced. 
Provenance unknown. 
The bust looks like a work of the 1830s or 1840s. 
APPENDIX I 
Plaster Casts From the Studio of 
Sir Francis Chantrey 
The Chantrey Casts: Technique and Conservation 
Chantrey modelled his sculpture in clay. Once completed each 
work was encased with a piece-mould from which a plaster cast 
could be taken. The true origival-the clay-was then broken 
up. The only works in clay by Chantrey which seem to have 
survived are small sketch models of which one, for his portrait 
statue of Mrs Jordan, is in the Ashmolean Museum (No. 456). 
The plaster casts usually served as the models from which the 
marbles were carved, although it is conceivable that the clay 
origivals were sometimes preserved long enough to serve this 
purpose. Most of the carving was done by assistants, but Chan-trey 
not only finished his busts hinself but sometimes did so 
from the life, requesting a last sitting for this purpose (not the 
nomal practice with his rivals). The differences betwccn plaster 
and marble sculptures-apart of course from polish and 
colountirc not remarkable. Not infrequently the plaster ver-sions 
reproduced vigorous clawed tooling, in drapery and to a 
lesser extent flesh. Such textures arc reduced to the finer marks 
of the rasp in the marble. In some cases there is a completely 
different treatment of the iris or pupil . The most obvious differe-nce, 
however is in the treatment of the hair, where the handling 
of the clay was most free and least easily imitated in marble. The 
plaster of wordsworth (No. 784), for instance, reproduces the 
worms of clay which were dropped on to the forehead, and in 
other cases, such as the portrait of Lady I.ouisa Russell (No. 
657), the poking and pushing of the wet clay is very visible. An 
equivalent but very different freedom of handling was sometimes 
achieved in the marble hair by use of the drill. 
Chantrey's handling of the top ofthc clay head was sometimes 
wild, even careless, it being a part of a portrait very unlikely to 
bc inspected closely: the cast of the bust of William Howley, 
archbishop of Canterbury, is a good example of the freedom he 
could permit himself (No. 721 ). In this case the points are also 
clearly visible. Cleaning has revealed these on almost all the 
plasters. They are always most apparent on the hair and are of 
two types- single point and a circled one-made with a pencil 
sharp enough to penetrate the surface of the plaster. 
Piece-moulds lcavc seams in the plaster casts but these were 
carefully cleaned off and their traces arc not easy to find except 
on the crown of the head. The reason for this is that when the 
piece-mould has bccn assembled for the plaster of Paris to be 
poured into it one small piece of the mould-a sort of plug-is 
left out so that the /o»7¢¢fo„G can reach inside the mould and 
ensure that the plaster has flowed right down. When he has 
done this he will rcplacc the plug, but thcrc arc bound to bc 
larger seams and more untidiness at this point which it would 
be tedious to conceal. 
The socles of the busts, when there was one, were all cast 
separately. They are of standard size and type and probably 
existed ready made in the sculptor's workshop in large batches. 
The join was made when the plaster had just been poured into 
the mould and it was reinforced with a large peg of deal-in 
one or two cases only does iron seem to have bccn employed 
for this purpose. 
It seems always to be the case that the head of each male 
portrait statue was scparatcly cast and then fitted, by the same 
method, to the body. When the statues were sawn up an attempt 
was made to convert them into busts, but often the heads must 
have fallen off and in many cases they were loosened. In the 
case of the statue of George Ill, for instance (No. 638), a 
smooth rim easily distinguishable from a sawn edge is visible. 
The female effides do not generally have separately cast heads 
but then they were often not really protraits at all. It was 
above all when the statue was a portrait that Chantrey found it 
convenient to work on the head separately and when he did so 
it was also cast separately. This must have been a common 
practice, but Chantrey's sculpture ccltainly suffers from it: in 
very few of his statues docs the body possess a very distinctive, 
individual, character-and in none is the body active. 
Most of the detached heads seem to be solid-as was the 
case for instance with the sleeping child (No. 655)-nd it is 
remarkable that this is also the case with a great many of the 
bodies, as can be clearly seen from the cuts through the chest 
(e.g. No. 670). Sometimes there is a hollow interior, although 
the walls are immensely thick. Such a hollow is visible, for 
instance, when the surviving pordon of the statue of Mrs Jordan 
is lifted up (No. 649). In this case it is clear that the plaster was 
handled in the hollow. It is likely that, in a case like this, the 
figure was cast in two parts. When the top part of the figure 
was being poured-head downwards-the /o7'7i¢¢forG would 
have reached in and pushed the plaster down into the head and 
then kept a sort of tunnel which enabled him to push it sideways. 
The immense weight of these casts does not sccm to have 
been regarded as a disadvantage. It obviously made them more 
stable, and more easily repaired, and it must have been necessary 
for the effective securing of scparatcly cast units. The surviving 
casts of wcstmacott's works show the same tcchniquc. It may 
not have been possible to make tight-sheucd plaster casts at this 
date, at least on a large scale. In my experience plaster casts after 
the antique made in 1780 or 1820 are far heavier than those 
made in about l880-sometimes as much as ten times heavier. 
From the studio sales of cightecnth-century portrait sculptors 
it is clear that they must have made numerous plaster casts of 
213
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
their busts-this was especially the case with busts of historical 
celebrities such as Milton, Shakespeare, Inigo Jones, and 
Newton. There is no technical reason why Chantrey should not 
have done this. In some cases a patron may have requcstcd casts 
for presentation to friends (this is documcnted in the sculptor's 
ledger in the case of Thomas Johncs of Hafod) but in the case 
of a famous sitter this practice made it casicr for marble copies 
to be made by his rivals and Chantrey, who was much irritated 
by piracy, may have been wary of this. 
All the same if a sculptor issued an edition of plaster casts 
properly inscribed with name and date he enjoyed legal pro-tection 
and could make a good profit without ever having to 
carve a marble version-r at least before hc did so. There is 
evidence that Chantrey did precisely this carly in his career: the 
plaster bust of Sir Francis Burdett (no. 685) reproduced an 
inscription neatly incised in the model as follows `modeucd 
by/F. L. Chantrey/published Scpt. 1 1810.' This reveals that 
the bust was made with publication of a plaster edition in mind. 
The same is true of the bust of John Home Tookc (No. 773) 
which is inscribed `modclled by F. L. Chan-trey/
published/December I/1810.' These busts were both 
exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1811, presumably as plasters, 
and the marble versions were only made much later. Burdett 
was in prison in 1810 for his pohitical beliefs. Tookc was a close 
ally. Chantrey surely made these works for the supporters of 
these two radical heroes-to whom indeed he was at that date 
himself sympathetic. Thercaftcr, however, it seems that Chantrey 
did not issue editions of plaster casts. 
On 7 May 1845, not long after the casts had been installed 
in the University Galleries, I.ady Chantrey wrote to the Curators 
(A4l¢."#fGf, Ashmolean Library, AMS. 41. pp. 8-9) urgivg them 
not to permit aftcrcasts of the plasters to be made. Her husband's 
own moulds had, she claimed, been destroyed. A few exceptions, 
however, were made. I.ater in the same year, and surely with 
her permission, Gcorgc Jones wrote requesting that an aftcrcast 
be made of the bust of Sir Francis Burdett for Miss Burdett-
Coutts (ibid. 11). An aftercast of a bust of `Dr Dutton' (pre-sumably 
Dalton) was permitted in 1866 (ibid. 38), and one of 
the entire statue of Roscoe was made at the request of the mayor 
of hiverpool after the marble, in St Georgc's Hall, was broken 
in 1893. 
As was mentioned in the second introductory essay to this 
volume Chantrey's plasters were described on their arrival in 
Oxford as `ganbogc' coloured. They must have been coated 
with shellac when in his studio. This would have protected the 
surface, making it harder and also easier to clean, but the sheuac 
would have darkened from a pale gold to a dark yellow and, in 
some cases, to a ruddy brown. The same witness recorded that 
the casts when displayed had changed colour. They must have 
bccn painted on arrival with the thin coat of a stone colour 
which all of the unrcstored examples retain. This paint contained 
shellac and was brittle and has in most cases flaked off in parts. 
It also bacane dirty - very dirty from the bascmcnt stores. The 
first and simplest, but certainly the least satisfactory, remedy was 
to coat the dirty sculpture with whitewash. This was done to 
the six items loaned in March 1951 to the Chantrey exhibition 
at the Graves Art Gallery in Sheffield-the busts of Nollekens, 
J. R Smith, Home Tooke, Wilham IV, George IV, and the 
214 
colossal Wellington (Nos. 742, 759, 773, 781, 709, 778). Apart 
from the fact that the freshness of the modelling was obscured 
by the inevitable thickness of the coating, the whitewash itself 
rapidly became grubby. 
During the 1970s a campaign of cleaning was commenced 
by Mohammed Saleh of the Cast Gallery. Mr Salch laboriously 
scraped off not only the stone-coloured paint but the original 
layer of darkened shellac. This last however had penctratcd the 
plaster, discolouring it to an uneven degrcc, and damp moulds 
had also contributed to stain the surface, so when the outer skin 
of the origival layer of shellac was removed the plaster often 
appeared a disagreeable, blotchy colour. It was also not always 
obvious where to stop scraping (No. 685). In 1986 the Pilgrim 
Trust gave a grant towards the cost of a larger campaign of 
cleaning which was carried out by Rachcl Kenward under the 
supervision of David Armitage of the Department of Eastern 
Art. The policy now was to leave the origival shellac skin-r 
to repair it when it had come off--which involved less risk to 
the origival surface and, whilst often keeping the plasters darker 
than they were originally, avoided the appearance of diseased 
skin. It is hoped that some of the more notable succcsscs of this 
campaign-the busts of Porson and Englefield, Ijord Farnbor-ough 
and Sir John Soane, and Queen Victoria among them-will 
be placed on display in the galleries. 
Another policy was adopted in the treatment of a set of busts 
which were sent out on loan to the National Trust at Belton 
House in Iincolnshire. At a suggestion of Alastair I.aing a virtue 
was made of the filthy condition of the stone-coloured paint. 
This surface was first patched with shellac where it had flakcd 
and then touched-in with easily removable paint. The colour on 
each was toned, with the same paint, to a more or less uniform 
brown to achieve an effect not unlike a `bronze finish'. This 
work was undertaken by Kathleen Kimber of the Department 
of Antiquities assisted by Catherine Gormley, a volunteer. 
Much work remains to be done on the Chantrey plasters and 
although an have been photographed for this catalogue many 
of these photographs document the damage to them and also 
the markings on them which so eloquently reveal the changivg 
attitude towards them-the neat black writing on the socles 
which identified them for the visitor in the 1850s and 1860s; 
the numbered labels stuck on them when they were consigned 
to bascmcnt storage-printed paper labels like those put on `left 
luggage' or goods consigned to auction; the chalkcd numbers 
scrawled on them in this centurylrude like the markings on 
trees singled out for felling; and lastly the neat card labels on 
ribbon made in the l980s which reveal a concern for the welfare 
of the sculpture and a respect for its value. 
The following works are abbreviated in the catalogue entries: 
The Manuscript ledger of Sir Francis Chantrey in the I.ibrary of the 
Royal Academy of Arts. 
JosephF.ishel,Et;chedRemini§encesOftheModelsdySirFrancisChmutrey 
in the University Galleries (Oxf;old, \85\). 
TL lame Poole, Catalogue Of Portraits in the Possession Of the University, 
3 vols. (Oxford,1912-15). 
AL. Ports, Sir Francis Chantrey 1781-1841, Sculptor Of the Great, 
Catalogue of exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery, I.ondon, 
and the Mappin Art Gallery, Sheffield, 1981. 
R. Gumis, Dictionary Of British Sculptors 1660-1851 (hondor\, +95\). 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
PART I 
Full-length statues, monumental effiges, and reliefs 
( mostly fragmentary) 
621. Dr James ANDERSON 
(d. 1809) 
23.7 cms. (height) 
Head broken at the neck. From a seated whole-length 
figure. Cleaned (to the plaster) by 
Mohammed Salch. Vcstigcs of shellac remain. 
Points visible. Parallel scratches on crown of head. 
Small hole in the back of the head. Probably a 
scparatcly cast unit. 
Chantrey tlft, no. 5; Efc4ed Rc7"G."j.fcG"cGf, no. 41; 
Lane Poole, no. 517. 
Marble erected in Madras, according to 
Gunnis. Commissioned 1815, paid for 1819 
(RA Ledger, p. 42), exhibited Royal Academy 
1819 (no.1181) as posthumous and to be 
erected in Madras. Andcrson was Physician-
General of the East India Company at 
Madras, also a botanist and agriculturalist. 
622. Stephen BABINGTON 
(d. 1822) 
45.4 cms. (height); 43.4 cms. (width across 
shoulders) 
Head and shoulders, sawn across chest and raised 
hand. Chipped on the sawn edge. From a seated 
whole-length figure. Uncleaned. Flaking on neck 
and side of face. An unusually red shellac. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 7S Etched Reminiscences. no. 37., 
I.anc Poolc, no. 519. 
Marble erected in Bombay, according to 
Gunnis. Commissioned 1824, paid for 1828 
(RA Ledger, p. 168), exhibited Royal 
Academy 1827 (no.1123). Babington was a 
judge in the Bombay Civil Service. 
623. Sir Joseph BANKS Bt. 
(1743-1820) 
31.6 cms. (height); 43 cms. (width across 
shoulders) 
Head and shoulders sawn across upper chest. From 
a seated whole-length figure. Large chips missing 
fi.om the sawn edge at proper right shoulder and 
to proper left of collar. Uncleancd. Slight flaking, 
especially on the face. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 9: Efc4cd RcowS.„!.JCG"ccf, no. 14; 
Lane Poolc, no. 521. 
Marble in the Natural History Museum 
(transferred from the British Museum). 
Commissioned for the British Museum 1821, 
completed 1827, paid for 1833 (RA Ledger, 
P. 147). Banks was a traveller and botanist, 
promoter of the natural sciences, President 
of the Royal Society, and Trustcc of the 
British Museum. 
624. Shute BARRINGTON, bishop 
of Durham ( 1734-1826) 
44.6 cms. (height); 35.8 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders sawn across upper chest just 
below bands. From a kneeling whole-length figure. 
The proper left shoulder has been broken off. Minor 
chips arc missing along the sawn edge. Uncleaned. 
Some flaking, especially to the face. 
Chantrey 5ft, no. I I; Efc¢Gd Rccoz."¢.fcc"cGf, no. 4; 
Imc Poole, no. 523. 
Marble, dated 1830, serves as his monument 
in Durham Cathedral. Barrington was bishop 
of IJandaff, Salisbury, and Durham in 
succession. 
625. Heny BATHURST, bishop of 
Norwich ( 1744-1837) 
40 cms. (height); 53.2 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn across upper chest. From 
a scatcd whole-length figure. A large chip is missing 
from the sawn edge at his left shoulder and right 
collar. The head is loose and was probably a 
scpa.rately cast unit. Uncleaned. Some fla.king to 
wig and robes. 
Char\:tray bR, no. L3; Etched Reminiscences, no. 
22; I.one Poolc, no. 525. 
Marble serves as his monument in Norwich 
Cathedral ( N. Penny, C4#rc4 44o„#owc"£f ¢.„ 
Roov¢»£z.c E"g/¢#¢ (New Haven, Conn., and 
I.ondon, 1977), 75, pl. 54). Exhibited at the 
Royal Academy 1841 (no. 1218) 
posthumously as the sculptor's last work. 
Bathurst was bishop of Norwich 1805-37 
and a VAg. 
626. Mary Anne, Mrs Matthew 
Robinson BOULTON 
(1795-1829) 
30.I cms. (height) 
Head and neck. Sawn across lower neck. From a 
reclining wh.olc-length figure. Part of the half has 
bccn broken fi.om the proper left side and the back 
of the head. Uncleancd. Extcnsivc flaking in hair 
and neck. 
Chantrcy dft, no. 16; Efcifed RGowG.~G.fcc„ccf, no. 
16; Ime Poolc, no. 528. 
Marble, dated 1834, serves as her monument 
215
AI'PENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
in the parish church at Great Tew, 
Oxfordshire (N. Penny, C4#"A 44lo„#owc„fJ 
in Romantic England (ENc:w Haven. Cor\n.. 
and Ijondon, 1977), 87, pl. 64). 
Commissioncd 1830, completed 1834, paid 
for 1836 (RA Ledger, p. 228). Mrs Boulton 
was the daughter-in-law of Matthew Boulton 
the entrepreneur. 
627. Mary Ann, Lady BRADFORD 
(d. 1830) 
46.2 cms. (height) 
Head and part of the chest, hands, and pillow. Sawn 
horizontally from a rcclinng whole-length figure. 
Much chipping at sawn edge. End of thumb of her 
right hand broken off and missing. Uncleaned. 
Extensive flaking. 
Chantrey Bft, no. 17; Efc4G¢ RcacG.#®.fce"ccf, no. 
40; I,are Poole, no. 529. 
Marble, dated 1834, serves as a monument 
in Har[bum Church, Northumberland. 
Commissioned 1831, completed 1834 (RA 
Ledger, p. 239). I.ady Bradford, wife of 
hieut-General Sir Thomas Bradford KCB, 
died at sea. 
628. George CANNING 
(1770-1827) 
41.4 cms. (height); 51 cms. (width at shoulders) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn just below shoulders. 
From a whole,Length standing figure. I.argc chips 
missing from draperies along the sawn edge. 
Uncleaned. Extensive flaking. 
Chantrcy dft, no. 22; Efchcd RGow;„;Jce»cef, no. 
15; I.one Poolc, no. 534. 
Marble in St Georgc's Ham, I.iverpool. 
Commissioned 1829, completed 1832 (RA 
Ledger, p. 214), exhibited Royal Academy 
1832 (no.1171, specified as of marble). 
Canning was a leading Tory statesman and 
orator. See also No. 629. 
629. George CANNING 
(1770-1827) 
31.2 cms. (height) 
Head broken off at the neck about two inches 
below the chin. From a whole-length standing 
figure. Unclcaned. Extensive flaking. The head was 
clearly a separately cast unit. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 23; lane Poole, no. 535. 
Marble in Wesrminstcr Abbey. 
Commissioned 1829, completed 1834 (RA 
I.edger, p. 213) Canning was a leading Tory 
statesman and orator. See also No. 628. Lane 
Poole erroncously connects this with the 
bronze statue in New Palace Yard, 
Westminster, which is the work of sir Richard 
Westmacott. 
216 
630. Thomas COUTTS 
(1735-1822) 
37.3 cms, (height); 44.6 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sa`m just below shoulders. 
From a whole-length seated figure. Chips missing 
along the sawn cdgc, a large one fi.om his right 
collar. A small loss to the point of the nose. 
Uncleaned. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 30; Efc4cd Rcacg.#G.fce"ccf, no. 
53; Lenc Poolc, no. 542. 
Marble in Coutts' Bank, The Strand, I.ondon. 
Commissioned 1824, completed 1827, paid 
for 1828 (RA Ledger, p. 167). Coutts was 
the co-founder, with his brother, of the bank 
Coutts and Co. 
631. John DALTON DCL 
(1766-1844) 
46.5 cms. (height); 48.6 cms. (width) 
Head, shoulders, and proper right hand. Sawn 
through the upper chest and wrist. From a whole-length 
seated figure. Chips missing from sawn edge, 
also recent damage to proper right shoulder 
(frogments from which survive). Uncleancd. Flaking 
on chin and around eyes. 
Chantrey dft, no. 35; E}c¢cd Rcow¢.cog.fcc„ccf, no. 
38; Irmc Pcolc, no. 547. 
Marble in the Town Hall, Manchester 
(formerly in the Royal Manchester 
Institution). Commissioned 1834, paid for 
1840 (RA Ledger, p. 259), exhibited Royal 
Academy 1837 (no.1162, specified as of 
marble). Dalton was a chemist and natural 
scientist, professor at New College, 
Manchester, and President of the Manchester 
Philosophical Society. 
632. Charlotte Elizabeth DIGBY 
(1778-1820) 
43.8 cms. (height); 38.7 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn through the breasts and 
upper arms. From a whole-length reclining figure. 
Chips missing from sawn edge. Unclcancd. 
Extensive flaking especially in the face. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 36; E}c¢ed RcowG.#£.JCG"CCJ, no. 
16; Lane Poole, no. 548. 
Marble, dated 1825, serves as monument in 
Worcester Cathedral (N.B. Penny, C¢#rc¢ 
Monttments in Romantic England (ENc:iw 
Haven, Conn., and London, 1977), 86, pl. 
63). Commissioned 1823, completed 1825 
(RA Ledger, p. 157), exhibited Royal 
Academy 1826 as `Resignation'. Mrs Digby 
was Maid of Honour to Queen Charlotte. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
633. William Henry Dawnay, 
Viscount DOWNE ( 1812-54) 
45.6 cms. (height); 52.2 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn through chest just below 
ermine collar. From a whole-length standing figure. 
Chips missing from sawn edge, a large one at proper 
left side. Uncleaned. Slight flaking to face. 
Chantrey bft. i\o. 37., Etched Remini§cence§. no. 
32; Lane Poole, no. 549. 
Marble in Snaith Church, Yorkshire. 
Commissioncd in 1833, completed 1838 
(RA I.edger, p. 256). In Chantrey's ledger 
the reference is to the earl of Downc, but 
this seems to have been an error. 
634. Robert DUNDAS of Arniston 
(1758-1819) 
41.5 cms. (height); 47.5 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn through upper chest just 
below shoulders. From a whole-length seated 
figure. The head, which is obviously a separately 
cast unit, is loose. A chip missing from sawn edge 
to proper left. Unclcancd. Extcnsivc flaking to 
forehead. 
Cha:utrey trft. no. 40: Etched Rcminiscences` no. 
51; Lane Poole, no. 552. 
Marble statue erected in the Sessions House, 
Edinburgh. Commissioned 1820, completed 
1821, paid for 1822 (RA Ledger, p.117). 
Dundas was appointed Chief Baron of the 
Exchequer of scotland. See also No. 700. 
635. Sir Edward Hyde EAST Bt. 
(1764-1847) 
43.7 cms. (height); 53.I cms. (width) 
Head, shoulders, and proper right forearm. Sawn 
through chest. From a whole-length seated figure. 
Minor chips missing from sawn edge. Unclcaned. 
FLaking. 
Chai\t[ey ¢R` no. 43: Etched Reminiscence§` r\o. 
12; I.anc Poole, no. 555. 
Marble erected in the Court House, Calcutta. 
Completed 1829, paid for 1832 (RA Ledger, 
p. 195), exhibited Royal Academy 1829 (no. 
I 198). East was Chief Justice of calcutta 
1813-22. 
636. Mountstuart ELPHINSTONE 
(1779-1859) 
46.8 cms. (height); 46.6 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn through the upper chest. 
From a whole-length standing figure. Minor chips 
missing from sawn edge. Uncleaned. Extensive 
flaking to face. 
Cha\ntrey bit, r\o. 47.. Etched Reminiscences. no. 7.` 
hone Poole, no. 559. 
Marble erected in Bombay. First payment 
1829; completed 1834 (RA Ledger, p. 216); 
exhibited Royal Academy 1833 (no.1177). 
Elphinstone was Governor of Bombay 1819- 
27. 
637. Sir Charles FORBES Bt. 
(1774-1849) 
34.8 cms. (height) 
Head broken off just below chin. From a full-length 
standing figure. A chip missing from the edge to 
proper left. Uncleaned. Flaking, chiefly on the nose. 
A scparatcly cast unit. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 50; Efc4c¢ Rcow®.»dec„ccf, no. 
23; Lane Poole, no. 562. 
Marble erected in the Town Hall, Bombay. 
Commissioned by the native merchants of 
Bombay 1839, paid for 1841 (RA I.cdgcr, p. 
295), exhibited Royal Academy 1842 (no. 
1304, specified as marble). Forbes was head 
of the merchant house of Forbes and 
Company, the biggest trading concern in 
Bombay, and also active as a political figure 
in Britain, vigorously opposed to the Reform 
Bill. 
638. RIng GEORGE Ill 
(1738-1820) 
38.8 cms. (height) 
Head and part of shoulders. Sawn across the 
shoulders. From a whole-length standing figure. 
The head (a separately cast unit) now loose. Dccp 
scratches across eyebrows and nose. Some chips 
along the sawn edge. Three holes behind the proper 
left shoulder. Uncleaned. 
Chai\tTcy tsft. no. 52., Etched Reminiscences` Ilo. 
21; I.arc Poole, no. 564. 
Marble statue, dated 1812, erected in the 
Guildhall, I.ondon (destroyed by enemy 
action,1940). Commissioned 1811, 
completed 1812, erected 1815 (RA I.cdgcr, 
p.15). 
639. King GEORGE IV 
(1762-1830) 
48.2 cms. (height) 
Head and part of neck. Broken across neck. From 
a colossal full-length standing figure. I.argc chips 
missing from curls. Uncleancd. A separately cast 
unit. 
Chal\trey gife` no. 54: Etched Reminiscences` no. 
17; I.anc Poole, no. 566. 
The bronze statue was erected at Brighton, 
the marble at windsor Castle. The latter was 
commissioned 1828, completed 1832, paid 
for 1836 (RA Ledger, p. 210). 
637 
217
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
640. General Sir Robert Rollo 
GILLESPIE KCB ( 1766-1814) 
42.7 cms. (height) 
Head and neck. Sawn through collar. From a full-length 
standing figure. Chipped along sawn edge 
with a pordon of the collar broken off. Cleaned by 
Rachel Kenward. Origival shellac finish rctaincd. 
Chantrey Bit, no. 55: Etched Reminiscences, no. 
25; I.anc Poole, no. 567. 
Marble serves as monument in St PauL's 
Cathedral. Commissioned 1816, completed .7r 
and erected 1826 (RA Ledger, p. 55). 
GiLlespie served as a commanding officer in 
India and Jamaica. 
641. Henry GRATTEN 
(1746-1820) 
43.9 cms. (height) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn across upper chest. From 
a full-length standing figure. Chips missing from 
the sawn edge all round. large chip missing below 
proper right collar. A large part of the proper left 
shoulder missing. Unclcaned. Extcnsivc flaking 
especially to lower part of face. 
Chanttey givtt. no. 56S Etched Reminiseenees` r\o. 
19; Imc Poole, no. 568. 
Bronze, erected in the City Hall, Dublin. 
Commissioned 1822, completed 1827, paid 
for 1829 (RA Ledger, p. 153), exhibited 
Royal Academy 1826 (no. 1067, as a `model', 
presumably of plaster, to bc cast in bronze). 
Grattan was an Irish statesman and orator. 
642. Regivald HEBER, bishop of 
Calcutta ( 1783-1826) 
43.5 cms. (height) 
Head and collar. Sawn across shoulders. From a 
full-length kneeling figure. I,arge chips missing 
from the sawn edge all round. Unclcaned. Slightly 
flaking. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 62; Efc4Gd RcowG.ce;fcc"ccj, no. 
27; hac Poole, no. 574. 
The marble serves as a monument in St Paul's, 
Calcutta (oridnally crcctcd in St Tohn's, 
Calcutta). Commissioned 1827, completed 
1835 (RA Ledger, p. 199). Heber, a poet 
and hymn-writer of note, was bishop of 
Calcutta 1822nd. See Nos. 643 and 714. 
218 
638 640 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
643. Reginald HEBER, bishop of 
Calcutta ( 1783-1826) 
42.7 cms. (height) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn across upper chest and 
also vertically at proper right shoulder. From a full-length 
kneeling high-relief figure, Small losses in 
the hair. Chips missing along sawn edge. 
Uncleancd. Flaking, especially on forehead. 
Chantrey gift, no. 63; Efc4Gd Rcow¢."¢.fcc#ccf, no. 2; 
I.are Poolc, no. 575. 
The marble high relief was erected as a 
monument in St George's Chapel, Madras. 
Commissioned 1827, completed 1830 (RA 
Ledger, p. 198), exhibited Royal Academy 
1830 (no. 1270). I,ane Poole confused this 
with the third of chantrey's monuments to 
Heber, the one commissioned in 1828 and 
erected in St Paul's in 1835 (RA Ledger, p. 
215, reproduced and discussed in N. 8. 
Pc;riny , Church Monuments in Romantic 
E„g/¢"d (New Haven, Conn., and I.ondon, 
1977), 76-8, and 213, pl. 56) which 
incolporatcs a small relief on its plinth of the 
bishop blessing converted Hindus but is an 
isolated kneeling figure like the Calcutta 
monument (No. 642). The head, however, 
a.nd the disposition of the curls are the sa.me 
in the versions in Madras and St Paul's. 
644. Francis Seymour-Conway, 
2nd marquess of HERTFORD 
(1743-1822) 
37.2 cms. (height); 50.8 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn across upper chest. From 
a full-length reclining figure. Chipping along the 
sawn cdgc, cspccially to proper right. A hole in the 
collar to proper left. Deep scratch in forehead. 
Uncleaned. Extensive flaking, 
Chal\trey bR, no. 67S Etched Reminiscences, no. 
50. 
The marble serves as a monument in Alccstcr, 
Warwickshire. Commissioned November 
1822, paid for 1827 (RA Ledger, p.152). 
I.ord Hertford was Ambassador 
Extraordimry to Berlin and Vienna 17934 
and I,ord Chamberlain 1812-21. 
645. William HEY (1736-1819) 
34.8 cms. (height); 39.8 cms. (width) 
Head, shoulders, and proper left hand. Sawn across 
shoulders and wrist. From a full-length scatcd figure. 
Chips missing along sawn edge, with large losses at 
the coat collar. Unclcaned. Eyes pcncilled in. 
Extensive flaking chiefly to face. 
Chantrey dft, no. 68; Efc¢cd RcovS."G.fcGrec¢j, no. 
54; I.ane Poole, no. 580. 
Marble in Leeds Infirmary, dated 1826. 
Commissioned 1820, completed 1826 (RA 
Ledger, p. 125). Hey was a notable surgeon. 
I.one Poole speculated that the statue might 
bc of his son, also William and a surgeon 
( 1772-1844), but the commission comes the 
year after the father's death. 
646. Francis HORNER MP 
(1778-1817) 
43.5 cms. (height); 46.5 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn across the chest. From 
a full-length standing figure. Uncleaned. Slight 
flaking to face and hair. 
Chantrey dft, no. 72; Efc¢c¢ RecoS.»!.jcc„ccf, no. 
29; Lane Poole, no. 584. 
Marble, dated 1823, in Westminster Abbey. 
Commissioncd,1817, completed 1823 (RA 
Ledger, p. 73). Homer was a barrister and 
statesman. 
647. sir Hugh INGLls Bt. (d. i82o) 
35.4 cms. (length) 
Head, shoulders, and por(ion of a rolled mattress. 
Sawn across chest and diagonally through the 
mattress to either side of the head. From a full-length 
recumbent figure. Chips missing along the 
sawn cdgcs. A large piece detached from the drapery 
at the chest (replaced for the photograph). 
Uncleancd. Very slight flaking. 
Chantrey ©ft, no. 76; Etched Reminiscences, no. 
58; Imc Poolc, no. 588. 
Commissioned 1826, completed 1832, paid 
for 1836 (RA Ledger, p. 178). Inglis was 
Director of the East India Company. The 
monument is hikcly to have been erected in 
India. 
648. Dr Cyril TACKSON 
(1746-1819) 
43 cms. (height) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn across chest. Chipped 
at sawn cdgc. From a full-length seated figure. 
Uncleaned. Slightly flaking. (The head was a 
scparatcly cast unit. It is now detachable and some 
plaster is missing from the junction. ) 
Chontrey Stt, no. 78; Etched Reminiscences. no. 9S 
Idnc Poole, no. 590. 
Marble in the hall, Christ Church, Oxford. 
Commissioned 1820, complctcd 1825 (RA 
Ledger, p. 216), exhibited Royal Academy 
1824 (no. 1006). Jackson was dean of Christ 
Church from 1783 until his resignation in 
1809. Chantry used the portra.it of him by 
Opie as a model. 
219
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
649. Dorothy Bland, known as Mrs 
JORDAN ( 1762-1816) 
39.2 cms. (height); 38.I cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn across chest. Cleaned by 
Rachcl Kcnward , 
Chantrey Sft, no. 81; Efc4c¢ Rcow¢.»¢.fce»ccf, no. 
30; Lane Poole, no. 593. 
Marble in Buckingham Palace. 
Commissioned 1831, completed 1834. See 
No. 456 where the sculpture is discussed 
more fully. 
650. Theodosia I.ouisa, countess of 
LIVERI'OOL ( 1767-182 I ) 
135.I cms. (height) 
The plinth is chipped at all edges and scratched. 
Chips arc also missing from the top of the head, 
the veil, and the upper edge of the chair. The top 
of the thumb of the proper left hand has broken 
off and is missing. A repair to the top of the chair 
(liquid plaster from which has run down the chair 
back). Uncleancd. Flaking, especially to top of head 
and to lap. Green and black paint smeared and 
dribbled on the dress. 
Chantrey aft, no. 83; E}c¢cd RccoS.„S.jccceccf, no. 
42; Irme Pcole, no. 595. 
Marble in All Saints Church, RIngston-on-
Thames. Commissioned 1822, completed 
1826 (RA Ledger, p. 145), exhibited Royal 
Academy 1824 (no. 1008, perhaps as a 
plaster). Indy Liverpool was the daughter of 
the fourth earl of Bristol and first wife of the 
Prime Minister. 
651. Sir John MALCOLM Bt. GCB 
(1769-1833) 
41 cms. (height) 
Head and neck. Broken off at junction of collar 
with shoulders. From a whole-length standing 
figure. A small perforation in the crown. Points 
visible. Uncleancd. Probably a separately cast unit 
which broke when it was attempted to detach it. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 86; Efc4e¢ Rcow¢."G.fcc»ccf, no. 
34; I.one Poolc, no. 598. 
Marble in Westminster Abbey and Bombay. 
The latter commissioned 1831, completed 
1836 (RA Ledger, p. 236, exhibited Royal 
Academy 1837 (no. 1161, specified as of 
marble). Malcolm was a. noted diplomat a.nd 
administrator in India. He was governor of 
Bombay. See No. 729. 
220 
650 
651 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO 0F SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
652. James NORTHCOTE RA 
(1746-1831) 
142.8 cms. (height) 
Thcrc arc large losses to the cdgc of the palette. 
Thrcc fragments survive (but do not quite fill the 
gaps). There arc three dents on the collar to proper 
left. The plinth is chipped, cspccially at the comer 
behind to proper left. A large piece has been broken 
from the proper right foot. Minor chips arc missing 
elscwhcre. Uncleaned. Flaking on the proper right 
knee and on the crown. 
Chantrey dft, no. 101; Efcded Reow¢.7¢¢.fcc»ccf, no. 
38; Lane Poolc, no. 613. 
Marble in Exeter Cathedral. Commissioned 
1831, completed 1840 (RA Ledger, p. 237), 
exhibited Royal Academy 1840 (no. 1074, 
specified as of marble). Northcote was a 
painter, chiefly of portraits, and a minor 
author. 
653. William PITT ( 1759-1806) 
57.3 cms. (height) 
Head. Dctachcd at the neck about two inches below 
chin. From a colossal whole-length standing figure. 
Large chip missing from cdgc behind head. 
Uncleaned. The head was cvidcntly a separately 
cast unit lcvered off, rather than sawn from, the 
body. 
Chantrcy &tt` no. \07S Etched Reminiscences, no. 
3; Iame Poole, no. 619. 
Bronze in Hanover Square, Ijondon. 
Commissioned 1831, completed 1833 (RA 
Ledger, p. 247). Pitt was Tory Prime Minister 
1783-1800. 
654. Sir Thomas Stamford RAFFLES 
(1781-1826) 
45.8 cms. (height) 
Head, shoulders, and proper right forearm. Sawn 
through chest and am. From a whole-length seated 
figure, chips missing from edge of coat collar. 
Unclcancd. Extensive flaking. 
Chantrey Sft, no. I 10; Efc4cd Rceez."z.rcc#ccf, no. 
20; Lane Poole, no. 622. 
Marble dated 1832 in Westminster Abbey. A 
bust of Raffles was commissioned and 
completed in 1817 (RA Ledger, p. 53). 
Raffles was Govcmor first of Java and then 
of singapore. 
655. Ellen Jane ROBINSON 
(d. c.1815) 
25.8 cms. (height) 
Head. Scvcred through the upper neck. From a 
whole-length rccumbcnt figure. Cleaned by Rachel 
Kenward. Picccs of iron and rust in the interior of 
221 
the head suggest that an iron dowel was used. The 
head sccms to have been a separately cast unit. The 
porous surface comes from air bubbles in the 
plaster. 
Etched Reminiscences` rro. \ . 
Marble group (of interlaced effigies of Ellen 
Jane and her sister Mariannc) in Lichficld 
Cathedral. Commissioned 1815 (RA Ledger, 
p. 43), exhibited Royal Academy 1817 (no. 
1029). The S/ccP¢."g c¢¢./drc" was among the 
most famous of Chantrcy's sculptures; the 
children themselves were among the most 
obscure of all his subjects. 
656. William ROSCOE MP 
(1753-1831) 
26.4 cms. (height of head); 23.I cms. (height of 
upper chest without head) 
Head and shoulders (the former now detached). 
Sawn through the chest. From a whole-length 
seated figure. Unclcaned. Flaking to shoulders and 1:`J¥ t 
hair. The head was probably cast as a separate unit. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 112; Efc¢Gd RcowS.„;fcc„ccf, no. 
10; Lane Poolc, no. 624. 
Marble in St George's Hall, I.iverpool. 
Commissioned 1835 (RA Ledger, p. 265), 
exhibited Royal Academy 1840 (no. 1071, 
specified as marble). Roscoe was a historian 
and promoter of cultural life in Liverpool. 
657. Lady Louisa Jane RUSSELL 
(later duchess of Abercorn) 
(1812-1905) 
28.4 cms, (height) 
Head, shoulders, hands, and dove. Sawn through 
the chest and wrists. From a whole-length standing 
figure. Cleancd by Rachcl Kenward. The head was 
cast as a separate unit and is slightly loose. Points 
are very evident. 
Chantrey gift, no. I 14; Efcded RcowG."G.fcc"ccf, no. 
5; Lenc Poole, no. 626. 
Marble at Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire. 
Commissioned 1817, completed 1818, 
exhibited Royal Academy 1818 (no.1116), 
delivered to Woburn 1819 (Potts, no. 26). 
Ijouisa was the younger daughter of the sixth 
duke of Bedford. She married the second 
marquess (later the duke) of Abercorn in 
1832. 
658. Henry RYDER, bishop of 
Lichfield and Coventry ( 1777-1836) 
33.5 cms. (height of head); 29.7 cms. (height of 
upper chest without head); 50.I cms. (width of 
upper chest) 
Head and shoulders (the former now detached). 
Sawn through the chest. From a whole-length 
kneeling figure. Chips missing from the folds of
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
both slcevcs along sawn cdgc. Uncleaned. Flaking 
to the crown of the head. A large crack under the 
chin. 
Chantrey Sft, no. I 15; Efchcd Rcow;„ifcG„ccf, no. 
13; hanc Poolc, no. 627. 
Marble serves as monument in Lichfield 
Cathedral (N. 8. Penny, C¢"rc¢ Mo"#owG„£r 
in Romantic England (INow H:aNen, Conn., 
and Ijondon, 1977), 78, pl. 57). 
Commissioned 1836 (RA Ledger, p. 284), 
exhibited Royal Academy 1841 (no.1251 ). 
659. Martha, Countess 
ST VINCENT (d. 1816) 
28.2 cms. (height); 36 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn through upper chest. 
From a whole-length kneeling figure. Chips missing 
from sawn edge and large chip missing from the 
veil to proper right. Treated by Kathleen Kimber 
(then Miss Wcstem) 1959ndo and given a new 
painted surface to imitate the colour and polish of 
marble, Flaking. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 131; E}cAed Rcw2;„£.TCG%ccf. no. 
31; hanc Poole, no. 643. 
The marble scrvcs as a monument in 
Cavcrswall Church, Staffordshirc (N. 8. 
Pcr\Iry. Church Moriunents in Romantic 
Eceg/¢»d (New Haven, Conn. , and London, 
1977), 71, pl. 51). Commissioned 1816, 
completed 1818 (RA Ledger, p. 45). An 
idcalized portrait reused by the sculptor for 
monuments to ladies-it could be mistaken 
as an idealized moumer as distinct from a 
portrait of the deceased (see ibid. 71-3) but 
for the presence of a coronet carelessly 
propped by her side. This coronet, however, 
was perhaps an afterthought, for it is absent 
from the plaster as iuustratcd in Efc4c¢ 
RcowS.„G.fcc"ccj where the composition is 
captioned `A cenotaph'. For Irddy St 
Vincent's husband see No. 753. 
660. I.ady Frederica I.ouisa 
STANHOPE ( 1800-23) 
35.1 cms. (length) 
Head, Sawn through the neck, From a whole-length 
recumbent figure. Uncleaned. Some flaking to chin 
and to veil. 
Chantrey gft, no. 126; EfcAc/ Rcee¢.„¢.jce„cer, no. 
41; I.arc Poole, no. 638. 
Marble serves as monument in Chevening, 
Kent (N. 8. Penny, C¢"rc47 Mo##coc"£r ¢.„ 
Roow¢»f;c E"g/a"d (New Haven, Conn., and 
London, 1977), 120, pl. 90). Commissioned 
1823, completed 1827 (RA Ledger, p.150). 
The monument is wrongly said by Fisher in 
Efc4cd RGovG."¢.fGe~cff to be at Chievling 
Church and by IAne Poole to be at Chieveley 
Church, Bcrkshire. I.ady Stanhope was the 
daughter of the earl of Mansfield and wife of 
222 
the Hon. James, son of the first Earl 
Stanhope. She died in childbed and the 
monument depicted her with her child at her 
breast. 
661. Jessie Anne Letitia, Mrs Thomas 
Taylor VERNON, with her two sons 
(d. 1840) 
147 cms. (height); 103,5 cms. (width); 27.5 
cms. (depth of base) 
Chipped at edges of base, especially in proper right 
comer, also on the drapery of the kneeling child and 
on upper edge. Uncleaned. FlaLking and scratched, 
Chantrey aft, no. 139; Efcded RGowG."¢.fcc»cGf, no. 
50; I.anc Poole, no. 651. 
The relief served as a monument to Mrs 
Vemon's husband (d. 1835) at Hanbury, 
Worcestershire. Commissioned 1836, 
completed 1839 (RA Ledger, p. 279). The 
porrfut of Mrs Vernon and her sons is 
obviously idealized. 
662. George WASHINGTON 
(1732-99) 
43.8 cms. (height); 54.5 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn through the upper chest. 
From a full,length standing portrait. Chips missing 
at the sawn edge. Uncleaned. Extensive flaking. 
Chantrey aft, no. 142; Efcded Rcow¢."!.fcc"ccf, no. 
11; Lane Poolc, no. 654. 
The marble is in the State House, Boston, 
Massachusetts. Commissioned 1819, paid for 
1827 (RA Ledger, no. 102), exhibited Royal 
Academy 1826 (no.1071). A full account of 
the commission is given in i4# B#//cty.» (June 
ig89), 254nd8. 
663. James WATT (1736-1819) 
40.4 cms. (height); 40.8 cms. (width) 
Head and shoulders. Sawn through chest. From a 
full-length seated statue. Chips missing from the 
sawn edge. Some shallow prelimimry sawing cuts. 
Unclcancd. Flaking. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 144; Efded RG„;.%j.fce7ecef, no. 
8; hone Poolc, no. 656+ 
OriSnal marble version serves as a monument 
in Handsworth Church, Birmingham (N. 8. 
Penny , Church Monunen:Ss in Romantic 
Erg/¢„¢ (New Haven, Conn., and I.ondon, 
1977), 198-201, pls. 142 and 143); replicas 
in marble for the Huntcrian Museum, 
Glasgow University, and Greenoch, and in 
bronze for Glasgow, and enlarged in marble 
for Westminster Abbey (now in the crypt of 
St Paul's Cathedral). Original marble 
commissioned 1820, completed 1824 (RA 
657 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
665 
666 
fof;i/ 
I.edger, p. 124), exhibited Royal Academy 
1824 (no. 1010). Watt was the most famous 
British inventor and engineer of his period. 
664, 665, and 666. David Pike 
WATTS, his daughter, and an infant 
(1754-1816) 
25.6 cms. (height of fragment of watts, 664); 
38.8 cms. (height of fragment of Maria Watts 
Russell, 665); 13.9 cms. (height of fragment of 
infant, 666) 
(664) Head. Sawn through the neck. From a full-length 
reclining figure. Uncleancd. Sheuac is 
unusually ruddy. 
(665) Head, shoulders, and part of proper left hand. 
Sawn through the hand and bosom. From a full-length 
kneeling figure. Chips missing from the sawn 
edge. Part of the middle finger broken off. 
Unclcancd. Points visible in hair. Flaking chiefly on 
face. 
(666) Part of head and drapery. Sawn through 
check diagonally. From the whole-length standing 
infant pressed against Mrs Watts Russcu.s side. 
Uncleaned. 
Cho[\:tray Stt, i\o. \45S Etched Reminiscences, no. 
35; Ime Pcole, no. 657. 
Marble group of David Pike Watts on his 
deathbed blessing his daughter Mrs Watts 
Russell, who kneels beside him with three 
children, is in llam Church, Derbyshire (N. 
8. Pc;:r\ny , Cbt4rch Monuments in Romantic 
E„4/¢"d (New Haven, Conn., and I.ondon, 
1977), 80-5, pl. 61). Commissioned 1816, 
completed 1827, paid for 1829 (RA Ijedgcr, 
p. 64), but erected 1826 (according to 
inscription). 
667 and 668. Mourners of James 
WILDAEN (d. c.1817) 
30.4 cms. (height of fragment of female 
mourner, 667); 52.3 cms. (height of fragment 
of male moumcr, 668) 
(667) Head, proper left forearm, and proper right 
shoulder. Sawn across shoulders and arm. From a 
full-length scatcd figure. Uncleaned. Extensive 
flaking. 
(668) Head and shoulders. Sawn across upper chest 
and cut vcll:ically through proper right arm. From 
a full-length seated figure. Head dcl:achable. 
Uncleancd. Unusually red in colour. Extensive 
flaking. The vertical cut is oritinal. 
Cl\antrey gLft` no. 67; Etched Reminiscences, Ilo. 
33. 
Marble group of a male and female moumer 
beside a sarcophagus (another younger 
female with her head buried in the lattcr's lap) 
668 is in chi|ham church, Kent, commemorating 
James Wildman. Commissioned 1817, paid 
for 1820 (RA Ledger, p. 273). The portraits, 
presumably of the deceascd's children and 
grandchildren, are obviously idealizcd and are 
not included in I.ane Poole. 
223
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
669. Sir Ralph WOODFORD 
(d. c.1835) 
37.8 cms. (height) 
Head, collar, and part of right hand. Sawn across 
collar and hand. From a full-lcngth reclining figure. 
Chips missing from back of collar, front of collar, 
the hair, the left nostril. Points visible. Partially 
clcancd by Rachel Kcnward. Painted in a white 
across back of collar. `WooDFORD'. A separately 
cast unit. 
Etched Runiniscences, rio. 57 . 
Marble serves as a monument in Trinidad 
Cathedral. Commissioned 1835, completed 
1839 (RA Ledger, p. 273). The head may 
well have been detached from the body 
previous to the destruction of the statues in 
1938 and this would explain the identification 
on the back. If it was put away in a cupboard 
after such an accident then that would explain 
its omission from I.anc Poole's catalogue. 
670. Female mourner 
27 cms. (length) 
Head, shoulders, and arms. Sawn across upper back 
and through the drapery below the arms. From a 
full-length kneeling figure leaning on a block. 
Fingers of the proper left hand broken. Unclcaned. 
Flaking. The body is solid. 
Etched Reminiscences, no. 45. 
Identified as `A Monumcnt' in the Efc4ed 
RG„¢.„;rcc„cef this idealized figure was 
doubtless employed, possibly more than once, 
as a church monument by Chantrey. 
671. Male and female moumers by 
an urn 
168 cms. (height); 112 cms. (length); 26 cms. 
(width at base) 
Base somcwha.t chipped. Uncleaned. Flaking and 
surface scratches. `8' painted in black on front face 
of plinth to proper right. Cuts on the necks look 
like preliminaries to decapitation subscqucntly 
abandoned. 
Chantrey aft, no. 8; Efc4cd RGow¢.„!.jccoccf, no. 49. 
Identified as a `monumental design' in the 
Efc¢cd Rcow®."G.fcG„cef this must have been 
projected, and was probably employed, as a 
church monument by Chantrey, perhaps on 
more than one occasion. 
224 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
672. Brace of woodcocks 
120 cms. (height); 47.3 cms. (length); 17.4 cms. 
(width) 
Chipped on crowning scroll to proper right and in 
the centre, also at lower comers. Unclcancd. 
Incised in model and reinforced in the plaster in 
neat capitals: `Two Woodcocks/killed at 
Hollcham/Nov. 1830/By Francis Chantrey, 
sculptor/At one shot!/Prescntcd to Thos Win. 
Coke Esq 1834'. 
Etched Reminiscences, rro. 6. 
The marble, dated 1834, is at Hollcham Hall 
(Potts, no. 29). Modelled 1833 and 
presented 1834 (RA I.cdger, p. 257). 
673. Hector recommending his son to 
the Protection Of the gods 
186 cms. (height); 144 cms. (length); 24 cms. 
(width at base) 
The plinth shattered at comers of base. Many 
fragments rcmaln. Numerous chips missing from 
cdgcs. Sawn line through Andromache's neck. The 
tip of nose of the nurse has been broken off, also 
the proper right thumb of Astyanax. Uncleaned. 
Flaking. 
Etched Reminiscences, rro. q7 . 
The marble, dated 1828, is in the sculpture 
gallery at Woburn Abbey. Commissioned by 
the sixth duke of Bedford. 
674. PenelopeJs rehactance to prodttce 
the bow Of Ulysses 
185 cms. (height); 146 cms. (length); 24 cms. 
(width at base) 
Numerous chips missing from edges of the base. 
The bowstring is made of jute dipped in plaster. 
The index finger of Pcnclope's left hand broken off, 
also the tip of the thumb of her other hand 
(prcscrved). Unclcaned. Flaking. `Penelope' is 
painted in black on front face of plinth. `Across her 
knees she laid the well-worn brow/And pcnsivc sat, 
and tears began to flow', from Pope's translation 
of Homer's I/¢.¢d (Book XXI), now only legible in 
the first half of the first line, is incised in the model 
on the ffont face of base to proper right. 
Paper label, no. 172; E4cded RccoS.#S+cc7ccef, no. 48. 
The marble, dated 1828, is in the sculpture 
gallery at Wobum Abbey. Commissioned by 
the sixth duke of Bcdford. 
675. Head Of a young woman 
18.5 cms, (height) 
Sawn across neck. Chips missing from the point of 
the nose, from some of the curls, and from the 
neck. Unclcancd. Flaking. Solid cast. 
The head cannot be identified for certain with 
any sculpture by Chantrey and is unusual in 
style. 
EL:+u,ITS,:,i,i!;,,rd,;i,,, 
225
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
PART 11 
Bust portraits 
676. John Hamilton, lst marquess 
ofABERCORN (1756-1818) 
74 cms. (height including socle); 12.6 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Bust cleaned by Mohammcd Salch. Some flaking 
shellac rcmalns. The socle unclcaned and loose. 
Points visible on neck. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey gift, no. I; paper label, no. 35; I.one 
Poolc, no. 513. 
Commissioned by the 4th earl of Aberdecn 
1820, paid for 1826, completed 1834 (RA 
I.edger, p. 120). Marble version dated 1823 
at Haddo House, Abcrdcen, companion with 
one of I,ord Abcrdeen. 
677. Dr John ABERNETHY 
(1764-1831) 
74,6 cms, (height including socle); 13 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Bust cleaned (to plaster) by Mohammed Saleh. The 
socle unclcaned. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey 5ft, no. 2; paper label, no. 93; I.ane 
Poole, no. 514. 
Marble in the Royal College of surgeons, 
I.ondon, dated 1833. Commissioned 1831, 
completed 1834, paid for 1835 (RA Ijedger, 
p. 234). Abemethy was an eminent surgeon, 
anatomist, and physiologist. 
678. Dr James ANDERSON 
(d. 1809) 
54.5 cms. (height including soclc); 9.5 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Bust cleaned by Mohammed Saleh. The socle 
unclcaned. Cracks across upper chest and neck and 
rear of head. Chip missing from proper right nostril. 
Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey ctft, no. 4; paper label. no. 61; I.anc 
Poole, no. 516. 
The marble was presented by an unknown 
donor to the Museum of Modern Art in 
Palazzo Pitti, Florence (Cat. sen. 703). 
Commissioncd 1819, completed and paid for 
1820 (RA Ledger, p. 42). The portrait was 
presumably posthumous. Anderson had been 
Physician-General to the East India Company 
at Madras. 
226 
679. Henry William Paget, 
lst marquess of ANGLESEY 
(1768-1854) 
76.2 cms. (height including socle); 15.3 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Bust cleaned by Mohammed Saleh. The socle 
uncleaned. Chip missing from point of nose and 
from lower moulding of soclc. Name painted on 
socle. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 6; Iame Poolc, no. 518. 
Marble at Plas Newydd, Antlesey, dated 
1816. Commissioned 1815, paid for 1816 
(RA Ledger, p. 41 ), exhibited Royal Academy 
1816 (No. 952). 
680. Sir Joseph BANKS Bt. 
(1743-1820) 
54.4 cms. (height) 
Bust cleaned by Mohammed Saleh. Both comers 
of front of squared-off chest chipped. Scratches 
above proper right eyebrow. Points visible. Vestiges 
of name painted on recessed band of chest. 
Chantrey aft, no. 8; I.ane Poolc, no. 520. 
Marble signed and dated 1819 in Royal 
Society of Arts, I.ondon, presented by 
sculptor 1819. Commissioned 1814, 
completed by 1819 (RA Ledger, p. 40); 
exhibited at the Royal Academy 1816 (no. 
953, presumably as a plaster) and 1818 (no. 
1105, presumably as a marble). Potts, no.17. 
For Banks see No. 623. Gunnis records a 
replica of the original marble at Petworth. 
681. Shute BARRINGTON, bishop 
of Durham ( 1734-1826) 
56.I cms. (height) 
Bust clcancd by Mohammed Saleh. Unusually heavy 
cast. Incised on the back in the model: `Bishop of 
Durhan/Aetat 89/-1822'. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 10; hanc Poole, no. 522. 
Marble dated 1825 in Manchester City An 
Gallery. See also No. 624. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
683 
682. Colonel Seymour Thomas 
BATHURST ( 1795-1834) 
79.2 cms. (height including socle); 14.3 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Bust cleaned by Mohammcd Salch. Some shellac 
remains. I.ock of hair broken off to proper right. 
Points on chest. Name painted on socle (this area 
left uncleaned). 
Chantrey gift, no. 12; Ime Poolc, no. 524. 
Marble bust in collection of Lord Bathurst, 
Cirencester Park, dated 1836. Commissioned 
1834, completed 1836, paid for 1837 (RA 
I.cdger, p. 260). 
683. Edward BIRD RA 
(1772-1819) 
55.4 cms. (height including socle); 13 cms. 
(height of soclc, including name tablet) 
Bust cleaned. Crack across chest repaired. Extcnsivc 
repairs to soclc. `E. BIRD. RA.' incised in model on 
lower edge of chest and `CIIANTREy/ 
scuLFTOR/1816' incised in model on back. 
Chantrey aft, no. 14; I.anc Poole, no. 526. 
Exhibited at the Royal Academy 1817 (no. 
1061 ). A plaster cast is in the National 
Portrait Gallery (no. 986), another in the City 
Art Gallery and Museum, Bristol (according 
to Gunnis). Bird was a painter chiefly of genre 
subjects. 
684. Sir William BLIZARD 
(1743-1835) 
74.3 cms. (height including socle); 12,1 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Cleaned (to plaster) by Mohammed Saleh. Some 
chellac and paint remains. Points visible. Small chip 
missing from drapery. Scratch on brow. 
Chantrey aft, no. 15; I.one Poolc, no. 527. 
Marble bust in the Royal College of surgeons, 
London, dated 1816. Commissioned 1815, 
exhibited Royal Academy 1816 (no. 960) 
(Potts, no. 17). A second version 
commi§sioned 1820, completed 1825, for the 
Ilondon Hospital (RA I.cdger, p.119). 
Blizard was twice President of the Royal 
College of surgeons and was co-founder of 
the London Hospital Medical School. 
227
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
685. Sir Francis BURDETT Bt. MP 
(1770-1844) 
69.3 cms. (height including socle); 12.7 cms. 
(hcightofsocle) 
Cleaned by Mohammed Saleh. Superficial chip 
missing from drapery to proper right. `Modelled 
by/F. L. Chantrey/published Scpt.I.1810' incised 
in model on back. 
Chantrey rift, no. 18; hanc Poole, no. 530, 
Exhibited at the Royal Academy 1811 (no. 
950). The copyright date suggests that the 
model was oriSnally made in preparation not 
for a marble but for an edition of plaster 
casts. Burdett was the Radical Member of 
Parliament for Westminster and in 1810, 
owing to his imprisonment in the Tower of 
h)ndon in the cause of Freedom of Speech, 
was a popular hero in I,ondon. Chantrey 
seems also to have published casts of 
Burdett's radical ally Home Tooke (see No. 
773). 
686. `Mr. Justice BURTON' (dates 
unknown) 
54.8 cms. (height) 
Uncleaned. large chip missing from cdgc of proper 
left shoulder and smaller one from chest to lower 
right edge. Name painted to proper right of edge 
of chest (`Mr Justice Burton' ). 
Chantrey dft, no. 19; paper label, no. 10; I.one 
Poole, no. 531. 
Commissioned 1824, completed and paid for 
1825 (RA Ledger, p. 172). lane Poole 
conjectured that this was Charles Burton, 
Justice of the King's Bench,1820. 
687. John J. Pratt, lst Marquess 
CAMDEN (1759-1814) 
76.1 cms. (height); 12.7 cms. (height of socle) 
Cleaned by Mohammed Saleh with exception of 
patch around inscription on socle. Some shellac 
remains. Points visible. Vestiges of na.me painted 
on soclc. 
Chantrcy Sft, no. 20; Ime Poolc, no. 532. 
Marble bust in the National Portrait Gallery, 
dated 1835 (no. 5241). Commissioned 
1833; completed and paid for 1836 (RA 
Ledger, p. 259). Gunnis records a. bust at 
Bayham Abbey, Kent. 
688. George CANNING 
(1770-1827) 
72.4 cms. (height including soclc); 13.I cms. 
(height of socle) 
Cleaned by Mohammed Saleh. Some shellac 
remains. Fine cracks on the neck and chin where 
repaired. Points visible. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 21; I,are Poole, no. 533. 
228 
Marble bust in the National Portra.it Gallery, 
I/)ndon, dated 1821 (no. 282), another at 
Chatsworth, dated 1826. The first of these 
commissioned 1818, completed and paid for 
1820 (RA Ledger, p. 88). Canning was a 
leading Tory pohitician. See also Nos. 637, 
638. There is a variant with a different style 
of drapery in the National Museum of wales, 
Cardiff, dated 1819, on the Committee Stairs 
of the Palace ofwestminstcr and in the Fclton 
Bequest at the National Gallery of victoria, 
Melbourne. 
689. Robert Stewart, Viscount 
CASTLEREAGH ( 1769-1822 ) 
75,2 cms. (height including socle); 12.7 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Cleaned by Mohammcd Salch. large chip missing 
fi.om front base of soclc. Scratches on the proper 
left shoulder. Points visible. 
Chantrey aft, no. 24; I.ane Poolc, no. 536. 
Marble busts in the National Portrait Gallery, 
London, dated 1822 (no. 687), Windsor 
Castle, also dated 1822, the Paul Mellon 
Center, New Haven, dated 1828, and at 
Powis Castle and Stratfield Saye ( both 
undated and perhaps studio replicas). A 
plaster cast at Cirencester Park. 
Commissioned 1820, completed and paid for 
1822 (RA I.cdgcr, p. 125). Ca§tlereagh 
served in successive Tory govemmcnts as 
Chief Secretary for Ireland and then I.ord-
Lieutenant of Ireland, as Secretary of war 
and then, 1812-22, as Foreign Secretary. 
690. Thomas Otway CAVE 
(1797-1830) 
77.5 cms. (height including socle); 13.6 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Cleaned and shellac renewed by Rachel Kenward. 
Chip missing from collar to proper right. 
Nuncrous points visible. 
Chantrey dft, no. 25; lane Poole, no. 537. 
Marble at Stan ford Hall ( Leicestershire). 
Commissioncd 1831, completed and paid for 
1832 (RA Ledger, p. 235). The bust has 
previously been identified as a portrait of 
Robert Otway Cave. Thomas was a Major in 
the army. 
685 
687 
I,ch..,ij.:2,`,,,,,`` 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
i.,.,t#,'Fit\ 
692 
691. Sir Charles Mansfield CIARKE 
Bt. MD (1782-1857) 
71.7 cms. (height including socle); 13.7 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Clcancd by Moha.mmed Salch. Points visible. 
Chantrey tlft, no. 26; Idnc Poolc, no. 538. 
Marble, dated 1840, lot 320, Sothcby's, 
London, 12 December 1985. Commenced 
1833, completed 1840 (RA Ledger, p. 262), 
exhibited at Royal Academy 1840 (no. 1199). 
The marble bust was presented by Chantrey 
to the sitter `as a mark of estecm', perhaps 
also in gratitude for medical advice. 
692. Dr Henry CLINE 
(1750-1827) 
73.7 cms. (height, including socle); 12.6 cms. 
(heightofsoclc) 
Cleaned by Mohammcd Salch.. Some traces of 
shellac remain in face and hair. Vestidal scans, 
most evident in the hair. Made from the complctcd 
marble rather than the origival clay model. The cast 
rcproduccs the chiselled text on the colunnar 
support behind the chest in the marble `HENRy 
CLINE/F CHANTREY SC./1825'. 
Chantrey dft, no. 27; I.one Poole, no. 539. 
Marble in the Royal College of surgeons 
dated 1825. Commjssioned 1824, completed 
by 1826, paid for 1827 (RA Ifdger, p. 165). 
A bust of Cline, possibly from the same 
model, exhibited Royal Academy 1813 (no. 
934). Cline was Master of the College of 
Surgeons in 1815 and President in 1823. An 
earlier bust of the same sitter, dated 1813, is 
in St Thomas's Hospital. 
693. Admiral Sir Edward 
CODRINGTON ( 1770-1851) 
71.2 cms. (height, including socle); 13.8 cms. 
(heightofsorlc) 
Unclcancd. Flaking extensively. Name painted on 
socle. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 28; I.anc Poolc, no. 540. 
Commissioned 1817 (RA I.cdgcr, p. 56), 
exhibited Royal Acadcny 1819 (no.1221). 
Codrington was a notable naval commander 
during the Napoleonic Wars, made 
Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean 
Fleet in 1826 during the war of Greek 
Independence but was recalled in 
controversial circumstances in 1828, made 
Admiral of the Blue in 1837. 
229
AI'PENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
695 
230 
694. Henry Thomas 
COLEBROOKE ( 1765-1837) 
71.3 cms. (height, including socle); 13.4 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Cleaned by Mohammed Saleh. Rcpalrcd crack 
across the proper left shoulder. Crack in the back 
of the soclc. Points visible. 
Chantrey dft, no. 29; I.ane Poole, no. 541. 
Marble, dated 1820, in the India Office, 
London (according to Gunnis). 
Commissioned 1819, completed 1820, paid 
for 1823 (RA I.edger, p. 98). Colebrook was 
President of the Court of Appeal at Calcutta 
and a noted scholar of Sanskrit. 
695. Henry COWPER ( 1758-1840) 
70.4 cms. (height, including soclc); 14.3 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleancd. Slightly flaking. Small perforation in 
rear of soclc. Name painted on soclc. 
Chantrcy rift, no. 31; Ijmc Poolc, no. 543. 
Marble in the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
Commissioned 1823, completed and paid for 
1827 (RA Ledger, p. 165). Cowpcr wias Clerk 
of the House of I.ords. 
696. John Philpot CURRAN 
(1750-1817) 
56.7 cms. (height, including socle); 11.7 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleancd. Socle repaired and refixed by Kathlecn 
Kimber and flakcd areas touched in by Christine 
Gormley in Scptembcr 1989. 
697 Chantrey Sft, no. 32; former paper label, no. 42; 
Lenc Poole, no. 544. 
Exhibited Royal Academy 1812 (no. 898). 
Curran was Master of the Rolls in Ireland. 
Lent to the National Trust, Belton House, 
Iincolrishire, December 1989. 
697. Sir William CURTIS Bt. 
(1752-1829) 
77.8 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.8 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleancd. Flaking in a small area of proper left 
temple. Name painted on soclc. 
Chantrey dft, no. 33; paper label, no. 44; I.anc 
Poolc, no. 545. 
Commissioncd 1827, paid for 1828, 
completed 1829 (RA Ledger, p. 189). 
Exhibited at the Royal Academy 1828 (no. 
1170). Curtis was I,ord Mayor of I.ondon. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
698. John DALTON DCL 
(1766-1844) 
61.2 cms. (height, including soclc); 11.9 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Unclcaned. Crack between soclc and bust rcpalrcd. 
Chip on proper right shoulder. Small chips on sides 
of chest, also on proper left car. Minor flaking and 
chips touched in by Christine Gormley in 
Septcmbcr 1989. Name painted on soclc (`) 
DALTON D.C.L.'). `DR. DALTON' is incised in the 
model in the lower cdgc of the chest and `Chantrey. 
1834' is incised in the model on the back. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 34 former paper label, no. 24; 
I.are Poolc, no. 546. 
A version in ivory 22 cms. high signed 
`Chantrey Fect. Chevcrton SC' was lot 77, 
Phillip's, Ilondon, 26 November 1985. For 
Dalton see No. 631. 
Lent to the National Trust, Belton House, 
Lincolnshire, December 1989. 
699. Admiral Sir John Thomas 
DUCKWORTH Bt. (1748-1817) 
69.8 cms. (height, including socle); 11.8 cms, 
(heightofsocle) 
Uncleaned. slight flaking. Small chip on the back 
of the base, and on the front ofthc upper moulding 
of the socle. Name palntcd on soclc. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 38; lane Poole, no. 550. 
Marble forms part of monument to Admiral 
Duckworth in Topsham Church, Devon, but 
adjusted awkwardly to term format, 
surrounded with a clumsy trophy, and 
surmounting a lively relief of a sea battle. 
Commissioned 1817, completed and paid for 
1820 (RA I.cdger, p. 77). A bust of 
Duckworth was exhibited by Chantrey at the 
Royal Academy in 1811 (no. 939). It was 
presumably the one of George Duckworth 
employed on his monument in the same 
church. 
700. Robert DUNDAS of Arniston 
(1758-1819) 
65,8 cms. (height including socle); 10.8 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleaned. Some flaking to drapery and nose and 
missing chip from the front of the socle retouched 
by Christine Gormley, September 1989. Name 
painted on socle (`DUNDAS, LD. CF BARON OF 
SCOTIAND'). 
Chantrcy gift, no. 39; hanc Poole, no. 551. 
Marble in Arniston House, Midlothian, dated 
1817. Commissioned 1817, completed 
1818, paid for 1819 (RA Ledger, p. 43), 
cxhibitcd Royal Academy 1817 (no.1051). 
The work exhibited may have been this plaster 
and a commission for the marble only 
received later in the same year. Dundas was 
Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer of 
Scotland. See also No. 634. 
I.ent to the National Trust, Belton House, 
Lincolnshire, December 1989. 
701. Probably Thomas Dundas, 
lst Baron DUNDAS of Aske 
( 1741-1820) 
68.I cms. (height including socle); 13.3 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Unclcaned. Extensive flaking. Small chip on front 
base of soclc. Touched in by Christine Gormley, 
September 1989. Name painted on socle (`LD 
DUNDAS'). 
Chantrey 5ft, no. 41; IAnc Poolc, no. 553. 
Marble at Aske Park, RIchmond, dated 1820. 
Another at Wcntworth Woodhouse, 
Yorkshire, dated 1824. Commissioncd 1819, 
paid for 1820 (RA I.cdgcr, p. 112). 
I.cnt to the National Trust, Belton House, 
Lincolnshire, December 1989. 
702. James DUNLOP (d.1832.>) 
72.7 cms. (height including socle); 14.2 cms. 
(height of socle) 
UncleaLned. Extensive flaking, chiefly to head and 
neck. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 42; paper label, no. 50; I.ane 
Poolc, no. 554. 
Commissioned 1836, completed 1840, paid 
for 1841 (RA Ledger, p. 281), exhibited 
Royal Academy 1841 (no. 1327). I,ane Poole 
identified the sitter as James Dunlop who 
died in the autumn of 1841 but the bust was 
described as posthumous when exhibited 
earlier that year at the Royal Academy. It 
might be a portrait of Lieutenant-General 
James Dunlop who died in 1832 although, if 
so, it is surprising that his rank is not given 
in either the ledger or the Academy catalogue. 
703. Mr EGERTON (d. c.1828) 
76.3 cms. (height, including socle); 13.5 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleancd. Some flaking. A break between soclc 
and bust repaired. Name painted on socle (`Mr 
Egerton'). 
Chantrey dft, no. 44; I.anc Poole, no. 556. 
Tentatively identified as a bust of Charles 
Chandler Egerton (1798-1885), surgeon to 
the Calcutta Hospital, by lane Poole, but he 
looks like an older man. No commission for 
a bust of any Egerton is recorded in the RA 
231
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO'OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
232 
704 
Ledger but there is a monument to a Mr 
Egerton commissioned in 1828 and 
completed in the following year which may 
well have incorporated a bust. 
704. George O'Brien Wyndham, 3rd 
carl of EGREMONT ( 1751-1837) 
75.4 cms. (height, including socLe); 13.I cms. 
(height of socle) 
Unclcaned. Flaking on head. The shoulder and 
chest to proper right broken off and lost. Name 
painted on soclc. 
Chantrey dft, no. 45; Idnc Poole, no. 557. 
Commissioned May 1829, completed and 
paid for 1831. Egremont was among the 
leading collectors and patrons of modern 
British art. 
705. Mountstuart ELPHINSTONE 
(1779-1859) 
62.3 cms. (height, including socle); 12.3 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleaned. Very little flaking. large chip missing 
from base of soclc to proper right. Touched in by 
Kathlecn EGmbcr September 1989. Name painted 
on soclc. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 46; Ijanc Poole, no. 558. For 
Elphinstonc see No. 636. 
Lent to the National Trust, Belton House, 
Lincolnshire, December 1989. 
706. Sir Henry Charles 
ENGLEFIELD FSA, FBS 
(1752-1822) 
52 cms. (height) 
Cleaned and repaired and shellac rcnewcd by Rachel 
Kcnward. A hairline crack runs from the proper left 
shoulder to the proper right collarbone. Points 
visible, mainly on the head. `CHANTREy/ 
scuLPTOR/1818' incised in the model to proper 
left side of hcrm. The sittcr's monogram (HC and 
E interlaced) is incised in the model in the lower, 
chamfcred, portion of the draped front of the chest. 
Chantrey aft, no. 48; lane Poole, no. 560. 
Marble in the Cleveland Museum of Art, 
Ohio (78.22), is slightly larger and has a more 
distinctly chamfcred treatment to the base of 
the chest. Commissioncd 1818, completed 
1820 (RA Ijedger, p. 71) but the marble 
dated 1818. Englcfield was an antiquary and 
collector. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
707. Sir Charles I.ong, I.ord 
FARNBOROUGH ( 1760-1838) 
74.6 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.4 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Cleaned by Rachel Kcnward. Points visible. A 
vertical crack, from the proper right shoulder into 
the neck. Name formerly painted on soclc. 
Chantrey 5ft, no. 49; I.ane Poolc, no. 561. 
Marble, dated 1820, in the National Portrait 
Gallery (2090). A repetition in the National 
Gallery dated 1836, given by a descendant of 
I,ong. RA Ledger records the latter (p. 
258 )-ommissioncd 1833, completed 
1834, paid for 1842. Farnborough was 
Paymaster General, a notable connoisseur and 
collector who became art adviser to Gcorge 
IV and a trustee of both the British Museum 
and National Gallery. 
708. John FULLER MP 
( 1757-1834) 
74.9 cms. (height, including scrolled plinth); 
13,3 cms. (height of scrolJcd plinth) 
Uncleaned. Slightly flaking on the drapery. Name 
painted on lower corner of scrolled plinth to proper 
left (`j. FULLER Esq. M.P.'). 
Chantrey aft, no. 51; paper label, no. 28; I.ane 
Poole, no. 563. 
Marble serves as part of the monument in 
Brightling Parish Church, Sussex (the frame 
by H. Rouw). A bust of Fuller was exhibited 
at the Royal Aca.deny in 1820 (no. 1048). 
The bust of him commissioned 1834, 
complcted and paid for 1835 (RA Ledger, p. 
263), was presumably a repetition. I.are 
Poole wrongly identified the sitter as a Fuller 
who died in 1839. The unusual scrolled plinth 
must be connected with its sepulchral setting 
for which, however, it was not adopted. Fuller 
was known as `Mad Jack Fuller'. He was an 
eccentric, a collector and a builder of follies. 
709. King GEORGE IV 
(1762-1830) 
82.8 cms. (height, including socle); 14.1 cms. 
(height of socLe) 
Coated with whitewash, now very grubby. 
Chantrey aft, no. 53; I.one Poole, no. 565. 
Marble versions are at Chatsworth (dated 
1822), the Royal College of surgeons (dated 
1823), and elsewhere. The earliest version 
seems to have been made for the king himself 
in 1821-2 may be that in the Royal Pavilion, 
Brighton. One in Windsor Castle is dated 
1828 and one in Buckingham Palace is dated 
1837. One version was cxhibitcd at the Royal 
Academy in 1822 (no. 988).
AI'I'ENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
234 
710. Sir Henry HALFORD Bt. MD 
(1766-1844) 
71.5 cms. (height, including socle); 13.7 cms. 
(hcightofsor:le) 
Unclcaned. Slight flaking. Chipped around back at 
junction of socle and bust which is repaired but 
loose. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey tift, no. 57; I.anc Poole, no. 569. 
Marble, dated 1825, in the Royal College of 
Physicians, Ijondon. Commissioned 1824, 
completed and paid for 1825 (RA Ledger, p. 
169). Halford was Physician to the Middlesex 
Hospital, Physician extraordinary to king 
George Ill, and Prcsidcnt of the Royal 
College of Physicians. He was the most 
eminent member of his profession in I.ondon 
in the early years of the nineteenth century. 
711. Sir chdrew Snape IIAMOND 
Bt. (1738-1828) 
62.5 cms. (height including socle); 10.6 cms. 
(height of soclc ) 
Unclcancd. Some flaking on head and neck. 
Touched in by Kathlcen Kimber. September 1989. 
Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey dft, no. 58; former paper label, no. 123; 
I.ane Poole, no. 570. 
Marble dated 1820 noted by Gunnis as in 
`private possession'. Commissioned 1818, 
completed 1820 (RA Ledger, p. 82), and 
exhibited Royal Academy 1821 (no.1139). 
Hamond was Comptroller of the Navy. 
Lent in December 1989 to the National 
Trust, Belton House, Lincolnshire. 
712. Revd William Vernon 
HARCOURT FRS (1789-1871) 
80.0 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.2 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Unclcaned. A large but superficial chip missing from 
the proper right shoulder. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey ctft, no, 59; paper label, no. 89; I.ane 
Poole, no. 571. 
Marble, formerly Philosophical Society, York, 
now City Art Gallery, York, d'ated 1832. 
Commissioned 1831, completed and paid for 
1833 (RA Ledger, p. 242). Harcourt, a 
711 philanthropist, educationalist, and scientist, 
was the first president and virtual founder of 
the British Association. A miniature version 
of the bust (marble, 21.8 cms. high) is in a 
private collection (photograph in the Conway 
Library). 
713. Charles IIATCHETT FBS 
(1765.>-1847) 
61.7 cms. (height) 
Uncleaned. A large chip is missing from the proper 
right side at the base. Name painted on plinth below 
chest. `Hatchctt/1820/F. Chantrey S.' incised in 
the model in bold cursive letters on the proper 
right side of the hem. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 60; I.anc Poole, no. 572. 
Commissioned 1820 (RA Ledger, p. 102). 
No date for completion is recorded but the 
bust was paid for. Hatchett was a chemist. 
714. Reginald HEBER, bishop of 
Calcutta ( 1783-1826) 
71.8 cms. (height, including socle); 14,3 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleancd. Socle chipped on base to proper right. 
Name painted on sacle. 
Chantrcy rift, no. 61; Ijane Poolc, no. 573. 
The Royal Academy Ledger records no 
commission for a bust. The explanation may 
be that this is rather a fragment of a projected 
statue separately cast and mounted as a bust 
by the sculptor-that would explain the lack 
of compositional interest in the drapery. For 
Heber see also Nos. 642, 643. 
715. William HENRY ( 1774-1836) 
74.5 cms. (height, including socle); 14.2 cms, 
(height of socle) 
Unclcaned. Much flaking. A break at the back of 
the bust above the junction with the soclc. Name 
painted on socle (`HENRy M.D.'), 
Chantrey rift, no. 64; socle label, no. 47; I.ane 
Poole, no. 576. 
Commissioncd 1836 and paid for 1842 (RA 
Iledger, p. 279). The dates suggest that the 
bust was completed posthumously. It was 
commissioncd by the Manchester Literary 
and Philosophical Society. lame Poole's 
suggestion that the sitter was Dr James 
Henry, a physician in Dublin ( 1798-1876), 
seems unlikely in view of the age and 
Mancunian connection. It must represent 
William Henry, chemist, of Manchester. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
ET=iHE 
716. Colonel Charles HERRIES 
(1745-1819) 
56.7 cms. (height) 
Unclcaned. Slight flaking at nose. hargc chip 
missing from base at rear and a superficial chip 
missing from the coat lapel to proper left. Name 
painted in chamfered area of base of chest to proper 
left. `Coloncl Herries/Chantrey ft 1822' is incised 
in a cursive hand in the model across the back. 
Chantrey gift, no. 65; socle label, no. 4; Ime Poole, 
rro.i;fl7 . 
The marble is part of the monument to 
Herries in Westminster Abbey. A plaster cast 
after the marble was lot 223, Sotheby's, 
Ijondon, 2 April 1985. The monument was 
commissioned in 1819 and completed in 
1822 (RA Ledger, p. 106). I.ane Poole 
conjectured that `Herries' was perhaps Licut. - 
7]5 Col. William Lewis Herries. Charles Hcrries 
was a colonel in the h)ndon and Westminster 
I.ight Horse Volunteers. 
717. Francis Seymour-Conway, 2nd 
marquess of HERTFORD 
(1743-1822) 
23.6 cms. (height of socle) 
Uncleaned. The base is broken into four picccs. A 
fragment of the chest is missing, (The photograph 
show the pieces rcassemblcd. ) Thcrc is slight 
flaking. There arc chips missing and scratches at 
edges of breaks. also on the base of the soclc and 
on the nose. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey rift, no. 66; paper label, no. 88; I.ane 
Poolc, no. 578. 
Bust and monument commissioned 1822; 
716 bust delivered and paid for l825 (RA Ledger, 
p. 152). See No. 644. 
717 
718. Sir Benjamin HOBHOUSE Bt. 
MP (1757-1831) 
68.4 cms. (height, including socle); 12.8 cms, 
(height of socle) 
Unclcancd. Slight flaking. Touched in by Christine 
Gormley, September 1979, and socle repaired by 
Kathleen Kimbcr. Nanc painted on soclc. 
Chantrey dft, no, 69; paper label, no. 49; I.anc 
Poole, no. 581. 
Commissioned by the West of England 
Society for the Promotion of Agriculture 
1818, completed 1819 (RA Ledger, p. 87) 
and exhibited Royal Academy 1819 (no. 
1222). 
I,ent to the National Trust, Belton House, 
I.incolnshirc, in December 1989. 
235
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO 0F SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
718 
236 
719. Sir Everard HOME Bt. 
(1756-1832) 
69.7 cms. (height, including soclc); 10.8 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleaned. Slight flalcing, most obvious on the 
nose. Touched in by Christine Gormley, September 
1979. Name palntcd on socle. 
Chantrey tlft, no. 70; former paper label, no. 52; 
I.ane Poole, no. 582. 
Marble in the Royal College of surgeons, 
I,ondon, dated 1816. Exhibited at the Royal 
Academy 1816 (no. 935). 
I.cnt to the National Trust, Bclton House, 
hincolnshire, in Dcccmber 1989. 
720. Francis HORNER MP 
(1778-1817) 
57.5 cms. (height, including socle); 10.5 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleancd. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 71; former label on soclc, no. 
86; hic Poole, no. 583. 
Marble versions at National Portrait Gallery, 
Edinburgh, dated 1818, and the Ackland Art 
Museum, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, dated 1820, also cxhibitcd at 
the Heim Gallery, I,ondon, autumn 1972 
(Paintings and Sculptures 1770-1830). F.rlst 
commission given 1817, completed 1818 (RA 
I.edger, p. 61), and exhibited Royal Academy 
1818 (no. 1075, as posthumous). For Homer 
see also No. 648. 
I.cnt to the National Trust, Bclton House, 
hincolnshire, December 1989. 
721. Wihian HOWLEY, archbishop 
of Canterbury ( 1766-1848) 
56.2 cms. (height) 
Clcancd and shellac rcncwed by Rachcl Kenward. 
Chips missing at back comer to proper right and 
made up at back comer to proper left. Numerous 
points visible. Vestiges of name formerly paintcd 
on lower part of chest to proper left. 
Chantrey dft, no. 73; ILanc Poole, no. 585. 
Marble, dated 1821, in the Paul Mellon 
Center, Yale University. Another with the 
same date in Canterbury Cathedral library. A 
plaster cast is in I.ambeth Palace. 
722. David HUME (1757-1838) 
73.7 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.7 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleaned. Nose broken off, rcfixcd, and rebroken. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 74; paper label, no. 63; Irdnc 
Poole, no. 586. 
Marble in the Sessions House, Edinburgh, 
dated 1832. Commissioned 1827, completed 
1832, paid for 1834 (RA I.edger, p. 203). 
Hume was Baron of the Scottish Exchequer. 
723. John HUNTER ( 1728-93) 
66.7 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.4 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Unclcaned. Widespread flaking. Large loss on 
proper right side of the socle; a smaller loss on the 
proper left side. 
Chantrey gift, no. 75; I.anc Poolc, no. 587. 
Marble in the Royal Collcgc of surgeons 
dated 1820. Hunter was one of the foremost 
anatomists of his day. 
724. John IREIAND, dean of 
Westminster ( 1761-1842) 
72 cms. (height, including socle); 14.2 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleancd. Shightly flaking on nose and drapery. A 
large break on the base of socle. Name painted on 
socle ( `Ireland Dean ofwcstminstcr' ). 
Chahtrey aft, no. 77; paper label, no. 18; I,ane 
Poole, no. 589. 
The marble, dated 1829, was presented to 
the University of oxford on 8 December 
1831 by the sitter and is in the Examination 
Schools, fomerly in the Bodleian Library. 
725. Thomas JOHNES MP, FRS 
(1748-1816) 
70 cms. (height, including socle); 13.3 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Unclcancd. Slight flaking and small chips touched 
in and a large loss in the socle rcpaircd by Kathlecn 
RImber in November 1989. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey dft, no. 79; I.ane Poole, no. 591. 
Marble previously on loan to the Victoria and 
Albert Museum, now in the National 
Museum of wales. Commissioned, 
completed, and paid for 1811 (RA Ledger, 
p. 74), and exhibited Royal Academy 1812 
(no. 894). The ledger records that eight 
plaster casts were sold to Johncs in addition 
to the marble bust. Johnes, the builder of 
Hafod, Cardigan, was an antiquary and a 
noted collector and patron of art. 
I.ent in December 1989 to the National 
Trust, Belton House, Lincolnshire. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
726. Edward JOHNSTONE (dates 
unknown) 
72.7 cms. (height, including socle); 12.6 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleancd. Flaking in several areas. Damaged 1984 
by a falling packing case and repaired. Some minor 
losses along the vertical repair from chest to neck. 
A large chip missing from the hair to proper right. 
The name painted on the socle. 
Chantrey dft, no. 80; lane Poole, no. 592. 
Marble in the City Museum and Art Gallery, 
Birmingha.in, dated 1819. Commissioned 
1818, exhibited Royal Academy 1819 (no. 
1204), paid for 1826 (Potts, no. 23). The 
sitter was an illegitimate son of the marquess 
72l(b) ofwcllesley (brother ofthc duke of 
Wellington) and not, as I.ane Poolc supposed, 
the Edinburgh physician. 
727. Walter KING, bishop of 
Rochester ( 1755.>-1827) 
52.7 cms. (height) 
Uncleancd. Slight flaking near lower cdgc. Chips 
missing from comers and on proper left ear. Name 
painted on front of bust to proper left (.King BP 
ofRochestcr'). 
Chantrey Sft, no+ 82; paper label, no. 67; I,ane 
Poolc, no. 594. 
Exhibited Royal Academy 1821 (no.1136) 
and eventually incorporated in the 
monument to King in Rochcstcr Cathedral-but 
a bust dated 1821 is also recorded in the 
Diocesan House, Rochester. 
728. Revd Alexander MACKENZIE 
(d. 1817) 
59.3 cms. (height, including soclc); 9.9 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
724 Uncleaned. Extcnsivc flaking. Vestiges of name on 
socle (`Mackcnzic.). Touched in by Kathlecn 
Kimbcr in October 1989. 
Chantrey dft, no. 84; paper label, no. 66; I,ane 
Poole, no. 596. 
Marble serves as monument to the Revd 
Alexander Mackenzic in St Paul's Church, 
Sheffield. Commissioned 1817, completed 
1818 (RA Ledger, p. 51). 
Lent to the National Trust, Belton House, 
Lincolnshire, in December 1989. 
237
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
729. Sir John MALCOLM Bt. GCB 
(1769-1833) 
79.4 cms. (height, including soclc); 12.8 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleancd. Slight flaking, mostly on socle. Name 
painted on soclc. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 85; lane Pcole, no. 597. 
Commissioned 1839, complctcd 1840 ( RA 
Ijcdger, p. 302). Malcolm was a noted 
diplomat and administrator in India. Hc was 
a govcmor of Bombay. See No. 651. 
730. Andrew Maconochic, 2nd I.ord 
MEADOWBANK(1777-186l) 
71.6 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.2 cms. 
(heightofsaclc) 
Unclcancd. Slight flaking to edge of draperies. 
Name palntcd on socle. 
Chantrey dft, no. 87; paper label, no. 17; Irme 
Poolc, no. 599. 
Commissioncd 1834, completed 1838 (RA 
Ledger, p. 288). 
731. Wihiam I,amb, 2nd Viscount 
MELBOURNE ( 1779-1848) 
83.2 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.2 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleancd. Flaking, cspccially to dra.pery and 
forchcad. 
Chantrcy 5ft, no. 88; paper label, no. 54; hoe 
Poolc, no. 600. 
Marble at Windsor Castle dated 1841. 
Commissioncd by the queen 1839 (RA 
I.cdger, p. 300). Mclboume was Whig Prime 
Minister in 1834 and again 183541. He was 
also political mentor to the young Queen 
Victoria. 
732. Henry Dundas, lst Viscount 
MELVILLE(1742-18ll) 
85.5 cms. (height, including plinths); 21.6 cms. 
(height of plinths) 
Unclcancd. Flaking, mostly on head, hair, and neck. 
Name painted on proper left side of front face of 
lower plinth. 
Chantrey dft, no. 89; Imc Poolc, no. 601. 
Commissioned 1830, completed 1832 (RA 
I,edger, p. 229). Melville was a prominent 
Tory Statesman. The plinth suggests a 
sepulchral setting. 
238 
731 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
733. Professor William H. MILL 
(1792-1853) 
73.4 cms. (height, including socle); 12.6 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Unclcancd. Some flaking. A recent break to the 
upper part and the soclc and to its base to lower 
left. A crack at the junction of bust and socle 
repaired but loose. Name palntcd on socle (`Rcvd 
Dr MILL). 
Chantrey gift, no. 90; paper label, no. 99; I.are 
Poolc, no. 602. 
Commissioncd by the Asiatic Society, 
Calcutta, 1839, completed and paid for 1840 
(RA Ledger, p. 293), exhibited Royal 
Academy 1840 (no.1198, specified as 
marble). Mill was Regivs Professor of Hebrew 
at the University of Cambridge. 
734. James MORRISON MP 
(1790-1857) 
78+7 cms+ (height, including soclc); 12.8 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Whitewashed, cxccpt for socle. Whitewash now 
gmbby. 
Chantrey ctft, no. 91; paper label, no. 31(?); Lane 
Poole, no. 603. 
Completed 1837 (RA Ledger, p. 289); 
exhibited Royal Academy 1842 (no. 1409, 
specified as marble). 
735. Revd Zachay MUDGE 
(1694-1769) 
71.5 cms. (height) 
Uncleaned. Flaking scvcrely. Name painted on 
lower part of chest. 
Chantrey dft, no. 92; I.ane Poole, no. 604. 
The marble forms part of a monument in St 
Andrew's Church, Plymouth. It is based on 
the portrait by Reynolds. Commissioncd 
1825, completed 1830 (RA Ledger, p. 179). 
736. Miss MUNDY 
66.2 cms. (height, including socle); 12.7 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleaned. Slightly flaking, mostly in the hair. An 
unusually red shellac on the face and neck. A crack 
at the junction of bust with soclc has bccn rcpalred. 
Touched in by Kathleen Kimbcr, October 1989. 
Vestiges of name painted on soclc ( `Miss M . . . dy' ). 
Chantrey Sft, no. 93; soclc label, no. 6; lane Poole. 
no. 605. 
Commissioncd 1825; completed 1826 (RA 
Ledger, p. 182). I.ane Poole conjectured that 
this might be either Laura (who died in 1842) 
239 
or Emily (who died in 1839), the daughters 
of Frances Mundy of Markeaton, Derby. 
Lent to the National Trust, Bclton House, 
I.incolnshire, December 1989. 
737. Sir Thomas MUNRO Bt. 
(1761-1827) 
67.2 cms. (height) 
Uncleaned. I.argc chip on lower corner of chest to 
proper left. Na.mc palntcd on chamfered pordon 
of lower part of chest. 
Chantrey ctft, no. 94; socle label, no. 126; Lane 
Poole, no. 606. 
Exhibited at the Royal Academy 1840 (no. 
1190, specified as marble). The bust served 
as a model for the head of the colossal statue 
commissioncd for Madras. The commission 
for the bust seems not to be recorded in the 
RA Ledger. Munro was Governor of Madras. 
738. `Mr MURDOCH' 
71 cms. (height, including soclc); 11.8 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleaned. Flaking. A fine crackle in the paint. A 
large chip missing from the proper right eyebrow. 
Chips to the proper left edge of the bust and to the 
drapery proper right. Name painted on soclc (`Mr 
Murdoch'). 
Chantrey rift, no. 95; socle Label, no. 34; I.ane 
Poolc, no. 607. 
I.are Poole conjectured that this might be 
William Murdock ( 1754-1839), the pioneer 
of gas lighting; a monument to him 
incorporating a bust by Chantrey is in 
Handsworth Church. The name has, in this 
case, been spelled incorrectly on the soclc. 
739. Joseph NEELD MP (MP 
1831-56) 
79.5 cms. (height, including socle); 13.2 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleancd. Flaking. Name painted on soclc. 
Chantrey tlft, no. 96; lane Poolc, no. 608. 
Marble, dated 1841, formerly at Grittlcton 
House, sold Christic's, IJ]ndon, lot 5, 22 
September 1966. Commissioned 1837, 
completed 1839 (RA Ledger, p. 288), 
exhibited Royal Academy 1841 (no. 1325). 
Neeld was an inportant patron of English 
sculpture in the 1840s and 1850s. He was 
the great nephew of the Royal Silversmith 
Philip Rundell.
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
240 
740 
740. Admiral Horatio, lst Viscount 
NELSON ( 1758-1805) 
93.3 cms. (height) 
Unclcaned. A break in the nose (repaired), losscs 
to the nostrils and to the hair. Chips missing along 
the cdgc of. the base. A vertical crack from the base 
to the neck and a diagonal one from the base to 
below the shoulder. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 97; soclc label, no. 12; I.anc 
Poolc, no. 609. 
Marble versions in the Royal Collection and 
National Portrait Gallery (4309) dated 1835. 
Commissioned by William IV in 1833, 
completed and paid for 1836 (Potts, no. 9). 
741. Sir John NICHOLL 
(1759-1838) 
73.5 cms. (height); 13.5 cms. (height of soclc) 
Uncleancd. Extensive flaking. Points visible. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 98; Irmc Poole, no. 610. 
Marble at Merthyr Mawr, Glamorgan. 
Commissioned 1832, completed and paid for 
1835 (RA Ledger, p. 248; see also Co#"try 
£¢/G (Nov. 1984), 1279). Nicholl was dean 
of Arches and a keen amateur scientist. 
742. Joseph NOLLEKENS RA 
741 ( 1737-1823) 
56.6 cms. (height, including soclc); 8.6 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Coated with whitewash, now grubby. Superficial 
losses to proper right of base of socle. 
Chantrey tift, no. 99; Irmc Pcole, no. 611. 
Marbles in Woburn Abbey (dated 1818) and 
the British Museum (Potts, no. 12). 
Commissioncd 1817 and 1818, and 
completed 1819 and 1820 (RA Iledger, pp. 
46, 63), exhibited 1817 (no. 1038, perhaps 
a§ a plaster) and 1818 (no. 1073, the Wobunl 
marble). Nollekens preceded Chantrey as the 
leading portrait sculptor in I.ondon and did 
much to encourage Chantrey's practice. 
743. James NORTHCOTE RA 
(1746-1831) 
26.7 cms. (height from break in the front of`the 
neck to the top of the head) 
Plaster of Paris treated with sheuac and painted. 
The paint, now grey, flaking in parts. Broken across 
the neck. 
Chantrey dft, no. loo; I.anc Poole, no. 612. 
Exhibited Royal Academy 1812 (no. 932). 
See No. 652. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO 0F SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
744. Anne Lucy, Baroness 
NUGENT ( 1790-1848) 
62.6 cms. (height, including plinth); 7.5 cms. 
(heightofpLinth) 
Cleaned and recoatcd with shellac by Rachcl 
Kenward. Points visible, Name formerly painted on 
plinth (`Indy Nugcnt'). 
Chantrey aft, no. 102 former soclc label, no. 7; 
hanc Pcolc, no. 614. 
Commissioned 1819, completed 1820, paid 
for 1826 (RA Ledger, p. 106), cxhibitcd 
Royal Academy 1820 (no. 1047). The Ledger 
records the commission as made by I<)rd 
Nugent (i.e. George, lst Baron Nugent) 
which confirms that the sitter was his wife, 
•as hone Poole conjectured. The unusual 
termination of the bust is inspired by the so-called 
C/#¢.e, a. famous bust portrait in Charles 
Townley's collection of antiquities which was 
acquired at Townley's death in 1804 by the 
British Museum. 
745. General Sir Denis PACKE 
(1772.>-1823) 
72 cms. (height) 
Uncleaned. A chip missing at the base to proper 
left. Unusually red shellac on the face. Name 
painted on chamfercd portion at the lower edge of 
the chest (`Gcn' Packe') and incised in the model 
on the proper left side of the bust. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 103; socle label, no. 41; I.one 
Pcolc, no. 615. 
Commissioned 1826, completed and paid for 
1829 (RA Ledger, p. 192). 
746. `Mr PERKINS' 
63.3 cms+ (height, including soclc); 12.2 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Clcancd (to plaster) by Mohammed Salch. Some 
vestiges of shellac remain. Points visible. 
Chantrey tlft, no. 104; I.anc Poolc, no. 616. 
Commissioned 1819, completed 1820 (RA 
Ledger, p. 109). Described in the Chantrey 
dft as `Mr Pcrkins, a brewer' and proposed 
by I.ane Poolc as Henry Perkins, bibliophile, 
a partner in the firm of Barclay, Perkins, & 
Co., brewers. 
241
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
747. Thomas PHILLIPS RA 
(1770-1845) 
63.I cms. (height, including soclc); 11 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Unclcaned. Some flaking. Touched in, Scptcmber 
1989, by Kathlccn Kimbcr. Name painted on soclc. 
Chantrey gift, no. 105; I.one Poole, no. 617. 
Completed 1816 (RA Ledger, p.11) and 
cxhibitcd Royal Academy 1821 (no.1128). 
Phillips was a painter, chiefly of portraits, and 
Professor at the Royal Academy Schools. 
Lent to the National Trust, Belton House, 
hincolnshire, December 1989. 
748. William PITT ( 1759-1806) 
78 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.2 cms. 
(height of sedc) 
Unclcancd. Nose broken off and lost. Old repair, 
now loose, at junction of bust with soclc. Name 
painted on soclc. 
Chantrey aft, no. 106; I+ane Poole, no. 618. 
Marble in Pembrokc College, Cambridge, 
commissioned 1832, completed and paid for 
1833 (RA Ledger, p. 253). Pitt was Tory 
Prime Minister 1783-1800. The portrait was 
posthumous. See also No. 653. Another 
plaster cast is at Cirenccster Park. The bust 
is derived from that by Nollckens. 
749. John PIAYFAIR ( 1748-1819) 
70.1 cms. (height, including socle); 13.8 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleaned. Flaking. Touched in by Kathlecn 
RImber October 1989. Name painted on soclc 
(`Professorplayfur'). 
Chantrey tift, no. 108; soclc label, no. 70; Lane 
Poole, no. 620. 
Marble in the Old Library, Edinburgh 
University. Commissioned 1812, completed 
and paid for 1815 (RA Ijedger, p. 22), 
exhibited Royal Academy 1814 (no. 782). 
Playfair was Professor of Natural Philosophy 
at Edinburgh University and a Fellow of the 
Royal Society. 
Lent to the National Trust, Belton, 
I.incolnshire, December 1989. 
750. Richard PORSON 
(1759-1808) 
61.4 cms. (height) 
Cleaned and recoatcd with shellac by Rachel 
Kcnward. Points visible. Superficial chips missing 
from the drapery to proper right and along the front 
edge. Na.mc formerly painted on the proper right 
side of rcccssed base of bust ( `Professor Porson'). 
Chantrey sift, no. 109; I.ane Poole, no. 621. 
242 
The marble is incorporated in the monument 
in the antechapel of Trinity College, 
Cambridge. Porson was Rcgivs Professor of 
Greek at Cambridge and one of the greatest 
philolodsts of his day. 
751. John RENNIE (1761-1821) 
78.5 cms. (height, including socle); 15.7 cms. 
(height of soclc including tablet) 
Uncleaned. Extensive flaking. Chips missing from 
proper right edge of bust. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey Sft, no.Ill; I.anc Poolc, no. 623. 
Marble in the National Portrait Gallery (649) 
dated 1818 with a different style of soclc 
(Potts, no. 18). Another with the same date 
sold lot 125 at Christie's, Ijondon, 17 July 
1984. Commissioned January 1818 (RA 
Ledger, p. 58), one version exhibited Royal 
Academy 1818 (no. 1072). Rennie was one 
of the leading civil cngincers of his day. 
752. Sir Henry RUSSELL Bt. 
(1751-1836) 
81.5 cms. (height, including socle); 12.7 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleancd. Flaking. Small chip on his left eyelid. 
Name printed on socle (`Mr Russell'). 
Chantrey ctft, no.113; socle label, no.121; 1mc 
Poole, no. 625. 
Commissioncd 1821, completed and paid for 
1823 (RA Ledger, p. 143). Russell was Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court in Bengal. 
753. Admiral John Jervis, Earl ST 
VINCENT ( 1735-1823) 
63,I cms. (height, including soclc); 10.3 cms. 
(height of sorlc) 
Uncleaned. Flaking, especially in drapery, forchcad, 
and nose. Eyeballs marked with pencil. Vestiges of 
nanc painted on soclc. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 130; I.ane I'oolc, no. 642. 
Commissioned 1815, completed 1816 (RA 
Ledger, p. 45 ), exhibited Royal Academy 
1816 (no. 949). A bust was also exhibited 
Royal Academy 1809 (no. 864)-this might 
have been a first version of which the 1815 
commission was a replica. St Vincent was one 
of the leading admirals of the Napoleonic 
War. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
753 
754 
756 
754. Princess I.ouisa Wilhelma 
Adelaide of SAIE-lvEIMAR 
(1817-32) 
66.6 cms, (height, including §ocle); 13.2 cms. 
(height of socle) 
UncLeaned. Earlobes chipped, most gravely to 
proper right. Rfpaircd and touched in by KathJeen 
Kimbcr, October 1989. Vestiges of name palntcd 
on socle (`Princess . . . of saxc-Wcimar'). 
Chantrey ctft. no. 116; fomer socle label, no. 9; 
I.anc Poolc, no. 628. 
Exhibited at the Royal Academy 1833 (no. 
1176). The princess was the daughter of 
Charles Bemard of saxe-Weimar and Princess 
Ida of Saxe-Meiningen. 
She died at Windsor Castle. 
Lent to the National Trust, Belton House, 
I.incolnshire, Dcccmber 1989. 
755. James SCOTT (1770-1848) 
75. I cms. (height, including socle); 13.6 cms. 
(height of socle ) 
Cleaned by Mohanmed Salch. Some shellac 
remains. Chips in the socle repaired. Origivally 
painted with the name `Scott Esq.' on the soclc. 
Chantrey dft, no.118; Ime Poolc, no. 630. 
Marble, dated 1833 and inscribed as 
presented to John Scott (the sitter's son), in 
the Royal College of surgeons. Commenced 
1831, completed 1833 (RA Ledger, p. 240). 
Potts (no. 20) conjectures that cithcr 
Chantrey or his wife had been treated by this 
eminent specialist on ulcers and rheumatism. 
I.anc Poole misidcntificd the sitter as the 
engraver John Scott ( 1774-1827). 
756. Sir Walter SCOTI` 
(1771-1832) 
76. I cms. (height, including socLc); 13.4 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleaned. Flaking severely. Name printed on 
soclc. 
Chantrey dft, no. 117; socle label, no. 62.; I.one 
Poole, no. 629. 
Marbles at Abbotsford (dated 1822), 
Stratfield Saye (an autograph replica of the 
Abbotsford bust, dated 1826), Draycott 
Manor (dated 1828, a second version)-lso 
numerous later replicas of the Abbotsford 
bust, some probably produced by Chantrey's 
studio. The first version commissioned 1821, 
completed 1822 (RA Iiedgcr, p. 140), 
exhibited at the Royal Academy 1821 (no. 
I 133, presumably as a plaster). The second 
version (at Draycott, made for Sir Robert 
Peel) commenced and completed in 1828. 
(Potts, no. 14, discusses all vcrsion§.) The 
243
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
Ashmolean's plaster is from the clay model 
for the first version. Scott, one of the most 
admired poets and the most popular novelist 
in Europe during his lifetime, became a 
personal ffiend of the sculptor. 
757. Granville SIIARP ( 1735-1823) 
58.2 cms. (height. excluding socle); 13.6 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleaned. Flaking. A chip missing from his hair 
above the sitter's right ear. The socle has split in 
two owing to the rusting of an iron cramp and has 
bccn detached from the bust. Name painted on 
soclc. 
Chantrey gift, no.119; Lane Poolc, no. 631. 
Marble in the Guildhall, I.ondon, destroyed 
29 September 1940. Commissioned and 
complctcd 1826 (RA I.cdgcr, p. 183). Sharp 
was an eminent philanthropist, 
758. Wihiam SIIARP ( 1749-1824) 
59.3 cms, (height, including socle); 11.8 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleaned. Slight flaking. A crack at the junction 
of bust and socle. Superficial damage to lower cdgc 
of chest to proper left. Socle rcpalred and colour 
touched in by Kathlccn Kimber, September 1989. 
Name painted on soc]c (`Wm. Sharp Engraver' ) 
and incised in the model in neat capitals on the 
lower edge of chest (`Wm. Sharp Eng . . . er'); `F.L. 
Chantrey/Sculpt./1813' is incised in a fluent hand 
in the model on the back of the neck. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 120; socle label, no. 124; I.ane 
Poole, no. 632. 
Exhibited Royal Academy 1813 (no. 928). 
Sharp was a successful engraver. 
Lent to the National Trust, Bclton House, 
Lincolnshire, December 1989. 
759. John Raphael SMITH 
(1752-1812) 
64.6 cms. (height, including socle); 12.4 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Coated with whitewash, now grubby. 
Cha.ntrey aft. no. 121; I.ane Poolc, no. 633. 
Marble dated 1825 in the Victoria and Albert 
Museum commissioned by Sir Simon Clarke 
1824, completed and paid for Dcccmber 
1827 (RA Ledger, p. 176), made from the 
plaster exhibited at the Royal Academy 1811 
(no. 936) (Potts, no. 10). Smith was an 
engraver and painter who spotted Chantrey 
when he was an apprentice to a frame maker 
in Sheffield and subsequently did much to 
promote his career in I.ondon. 
244 
760. Sir John SOANE RA 
(1753-1837) 
76.8 cms. (height, including socle); 13.2 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Cleaned and rccoated with shellac by Rachcl 
Kcnward. Minor chips filled and loose junctions 
with soclc repaired. Points visible, 
Chantrey dft, no. 122; I.one Poolc, no. 634. 
Marble, presented by the sculptor, in Sir John 
Soanc museum, I.ondon. Commissioned 
1829, completed 1830, exhibited Royal 
Academy 1830. Soane was one of the leading 
architects of the period. In return for the bust 
Soa.ne designed the anteroom to Chantrey's 
gallery. 
761. May SoMERVILLE 
(1780-1872) 
73.3 cms. (height, including socle); 12,4 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Superficially cleaned (to plaster). Much shellac and 
some paint remains. Points visible. Slight chips 
missing from the nose. Name painted on the socle 
(`Mrssomervillc'). 
Chantrey aft, no. 123; I.one Poole, no. 635. 
Marble, da.ted 1840, in the Royal Society, 
Ilondon. Commissioned 1833, completed 
1836 (RA Ledger, p. 261), exhibited Royal 
Academy 1837 (no. 1272, specified as 
marble), paid for 1842 (Potts, no. 21, with a 
full account of the commission). There are 
oddities of dating for which several 
explanations can be advanced. The 
preliminary drawings for the portrait are dated 
1832 (before the commission) and the 
marble bust although exhibited in 1837 is 
dated 1840. Mrs Somervillc was a noted 
scientist. 
762. Robert SOUTHEY 
(1774-1843) 
73.5 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.5 cms. 
(heightofscx:lc) 
Cleaned, the old join and shellac renewed by Rachcl 
Kcnward. Name formerly painted on socle. 
Chantrey gift, no. 124; I.anc Poole, no. 636. 
Marble, dated 1832, in National Portrait 
Gallery (3956). Commissioncd by John 
Murray 1828, completed 1832 (RA Ledger, 
p. 213), exhibited Royal Academy 1837 (no. 
1271, specified as marble). (Potts, no.15, 
discusses the circumstances of this 
commission and accounts for the delayed 
delivery. ) Southey was made Poet I.aureate 
in 1813. Hc was noted for his biographies as 
well as his poetry. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
763. George John, 2nd Earl 
SPENCER ( 1758-1834) 
54.6 cms. (height, including socle) 
Uncleaned. Three chips missing from front edge, 
two to proper left. Name painted on front cdgc of 
chest to proper richt. 
Chantrey 5ft, no. 125; I,anc Poolc, no. 637. 
Commissioned 1818, completed 1820 (RA 
I.edger, p. 72), exhibited Royal Academy 
1819 (no. 1216). 
763 764. Thomas STOTIIARD RA 
(1755-1834) 
59.5 cms. (including soclc); 9.8 cms. (height of 
soclc, including tablet) 
Cleaned (to plaster) by Mohammcd Salch. Vestiges 
of shellac remain. Points visible in hair. Incised in 
neat capitals in the model along the front cdgc 
`THOMAS STOTHARD R.A.. 
Chantrey aft, no. 127; I.anc Poole, no. 639. 
Exhibited Royal Academy 1812 (no. 927). 
Stothard was a painter, a prolific illustrator, 
and a friend of the sculptor. 
765. Wilhan STRUTT 
(1756-1830). 
73.5 cms. (height, including socle); 14.3 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Unclcancd. Extcnsivc flaking especially on face. 
Hole in base of socle. Name painted on soclc 
(`Strutt,)+ 
Chantrey gift, no. 128; Lane Poole, no. 640. 
Marble, dated 1841, in Derby Museum and 
Art Gallery. Commissioned 1835, completed 
1840 (RA Ledger, p. 273). Identified by I.ane 
Poole as Joseph Strutt, but by Potts (no. 22) 
as a posthumous portrait of william of the 
sane family. The latter was an industrialist, 
philanthropist, economist, and inventor. 
766. Wmam STUART, archbishop 
of inagh ( 1755-1822) 
71 cms. (height, including socle); 13.4 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Unclcancd. The carlobc and the back of the head 
to proper right slightly chipped. Name painted on 
socle. 
Chantrey dft, no. 129; Ime Pcole, no. 641. 
Marble in the Victoria and Albcrt Museuni 
(A.137-1956). ` 
245
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO 0F SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
767. Augustus Frederick, duke of 
SUSSEX ( 1773-1843) 
81.7 cms. (height, including soclc); 10.7 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleancd. Chip at the front of the base of the 
soclc. Name painted on soclc (`H.RH. the Duke 
of sussex.). 
Chantrey aft, no. 132; soclc label, no, 60; I.ane 
Poole. no. 644. 
Marble in the Frccmason's Hall, I|)ndon. 
Commissioned 1829 by the Royal ljodge of 
Freemasons, completed 1831 (RA Ledger, p. 
224), exhibited Royal Academy 1832 (no. 
1218). The duke of sussex was the sixth son 
of King Gcorgc Ill. He was a Whig in politics 
in opposition to the rest of his finily. 
768. George Granville Levcson-
Gower, 2nd duke of 
SUTHERI.AND ( 1786-1861) 
75.2 cms. (height, including soclc); 12.4 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Unclcaned. Slight flaking cspccially in drapery. 
Nanc painted on soclc. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 133; I.anc Poole, no. 645. 
Marble, dated 1829, in the Royal 
Hordcultural Society, I.ondon. 
Commissioned 1828; exhibited Royal 
Academy 1829 (no. 1203, as marquess of 
Stafford), paid for 1830 (Potts, no. 25). A 
replica was commissioncd by the duchess in 
1829 and completed in 1830. This is in the 
National Portrait Gallery, I.ondon ( 5597). 
The duke was one of the wealthiest men in 
Britain. 
769. Charles Manners SUTroN, 
archbishop of Canterbury 
(1755-1828) 
56,5 cms. (height, excluding socle); 11.6 cms. 
(height of sorlc ) 
Unclcaned. Bust detached ffom soclc which is 
broken in two pieces. The nose and proper left 
carlobe broken off (fragments survive). Name 
palntcd on soclc. 
Chantrey aft, no. 134; soclc label, no. 57; hanc 
Poole, no, 646. 
The commission sccms not to be recorded in 
the RA Ledger. A plaster cast of the marble 
is in Emmanuel Concgc hibrary, Cambridge. 
246 
770. George Watson TAYLOR MP 
(d. 1841) 
69.7 cms. (height, including socle); 11.7 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleaned. Flaking on drapery. Socle dctachcd and 
refixed. Chips to front of soclc to proper left. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 135; I.arc Poolc, no. 647. 
Commis§ioned 1819, completed 1820, a.nd 
noted as unpaid (RA Ledger, p. 89), exhibited 
Royal Academy 1820 (no. 1044). Taylor was 
MP for Devizes. 
771. Sir Matthew TIERNEY Bt. 
(1776-1845) 
73 cms. (height, including socle); 12.9 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleaned. Superficial losses to back of proper left 
shoulder. Point of nose broken off, refixed, and 
detached. Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 136; socle label, no. 80; Irme 
Poole. no. 648. 
Commissioned 1827, completed 1828, and 
presented by the sculptor to I.ady Tiemey (RA 
Ledger, p. 202), perhaps in gratitude for 
medical services. Tiemey was physician to 
RIng George IV and RIng William IV. 
772. Thomas TOMKINS 
(1743-1816) 
59.6 cms. (height, including soclc); 10,2 cms. 
(height of socle ) 
Cleaned, losses to upper tip and forchcad filled, and 
shellac rencwcd by Rachcl Kcnward. Chips missing 
from curl over proper left car and to base of socle. 
The nose and upper lip were broken off and 
rcattached probably in the last century: the join is 
very obvious. Name formerly painted on socle 
`Tompkins Esq'. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 137; I.anc Poolc, no. 649. 
Marble in the British Museum dated 1816. 
Commissioncd 1816, completed 1817 (RA 
Ledger, p. 39); exhibited Royal Academy 
presumably as a cast 1816 (no. 948). 
Tomkins was author of the BG¢„fS.GJ a/ 
Wr!.f!."g. He kept a writing school in 
Ilondon. The identification is due to lane 
Poole who noted the similarity with an 
engraving of a portrait of Tomkins by 
Englcheart. 
767 
768 
770 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
773. John Home TOORE 
(1736-1812) 
63.5 cms, (height, including socle); 8 cms. 
( height of socle) 
Coated with whitewash, now grubby. Flaking 
around nose and proper right eyebrow probably 
indicates rcpalrs. Crack bctwecn bust and socle 
repaired. Incised in the model on the back of the 
bust: `modelled by F.L. 
Chantrey/Published/December I/1810. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 138; I.ane Poole, no. 650. 
Marble in the Fitzwilliam Museum, 
Cambridge. Exhibited Royal Academy 1811 
(no. 945). The incised inscription on the 
plaster suggests that an edition in plaster was 
probably available in 1810, perhaps previous 
to the completion of the marble. The bust 
exhibited 1811 may also have been a plaster, 
but the RA I.edger (p. 81) records a version 
commissioned 1818 and completed 1820 at 
a reduced price ( loo guineas) appropriate for 
a replica-this was not paid for and the bust 
was presented by Lady Chantrey to the 
Fitzwilliam in 1861. Potts (no. 5) does not 
discuss the bust exhibited in 1811 or the 
inscription on the plaster. Chantrey's bust of 
Tookc's political ally and fiiend Burdctt was 
also available in a plaster edition (see No. 
694). Tooke, a philologist and radical 
politician, was a close friend of Chantrey and 
did much to support him in his early years in 
London. The bust is shown in a pastel portrait 
by Cha.ntrey's ffiend John Raphael Smith 
dated July 1811 of Tooke's illegitimate 
daughters Mary and Charlotte Hart (lot 43, 
Sotheby's, I.ondon, 16 November 1988). 
774. Queen VICTORIA 
(1819-1901) 
69.6 cms. (height, including socle); 12.2 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Clcancd, base repaired, and shellac renewed by 
Rachcl Kenward. An iron dowcl (shightly rusting) 
visible at the top of the soclc. Some points visible. 
Chantrey 5ft, no. 140; former soclc label, no. 59; 
Lane Poolc, no. 652. 
Marble, dated 1839, at Windsor Castle. 
Replica, dated 1841, in National Portrait 
Gallery (1716). First Commissioned 1838, 
complctcd and paid for 1840 (RA Ledger, p. 
294), exhibited Royal Academy 1840 (no. 
1070, specified as marble).
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO 0F SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
775. `Mr WARP' 
57.5 cms. (height, including soclc); 11.4 cms. 
(height of socle, including tablet) 
Cleaned (to plaster) by Mohammed Saleh, Vestiges 
of shellac in the hair. Much of the surface scoured. 
Deep scratches on temple to proper right. 
Chantrey aft, no. 141; I.anc Poole, no. 653. 
There is no record of this commission in the 
Royal Academy I.cdger. In the early lists of 
the Sfts the sitter is identified simply as `Mr 
Warp, merchant'. The marble was lot 149, 
Christie's, I.ondon, 24 September 1987 as `A 
rare early nineteenth century English marble 
bust of an elderly gentleman' chiselled 
`CHANTREy, SCULPTOR 1816'. 
776. James WATT (1736-1819) 
65.9 cms. (height, including socle); 12.6 cms. 
(heightofsocle) 
Uncleancd, Extensive flaking especially on face. 
Vestiges of name painted on soclc. 
Chantrey rift, no. 143; soclc Label, no, 124; I.ane 
Pcolc, no. 655. 
Numerous marble versions, of which that in 
the possession of I.ord Gibson-Watt (Potts, 
no. 16) is likely to be the second made. The 
first, commissioned by Watt himself in 1814, 
completed and exhibited Royal Academy in 
1815 (no. 886), probably passed, on Watt's 
death, to Matthew Boulton. The replica 
ordered by Jancs Wan junior, the engiveer's 
son, in 1822 was supplied and paid for in the 
same year (RA Ledger, p. 136-Potts dates 
this transaction to 1816 presumably because 
the bust with which hc identifies it is dated 
1816, but the bust may have been made 
previous to the order). Watt invented, among 
much else, an improved steam engive. Scc 
No. 663. 
777. Arthur Wellesley, duke of 
WELLINGTON ( 1769-1852) 
77.9 cms. (height, including socle); 12.I cms. 
(height of sorlc) 
Unclcaned, Stight flaking. Some scratches to the 
drapery. Chips missing to hair and to eyebrow to 
proper right. loose on socLe. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 146; I.one Poole, no. 658. 
Marbles at Windsor Castle, dated 1828, 
Buckingham Palace, dated 1837, and 
Petworth House. The latter version 
commissioned by the earl of Egremont in 
1828, completed in the same year, and paid 
for 1831 (RA Ledger, p. 206) and that 
commissioned by Ilord Brownlow 1836, 
248 
completed 1840 (ibid. 278), arc likely to be 
replicas. Wellington was Commander-in-
Chief of the British Army in the Napoleonic 
Wars and subsequently Tory Prime Minister, 
1827-30. See No. 778. 
778. Arthur Wellesley, duke of 
WELLINGTON ( 1769-1852) 
83.5 cms. (height) 
Coated with whitewash. now grubby and flaking in 
several spots on the face revealing dirt below. A 
stight chip also lower front of chest to proper right. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 147; hanc Poolc, no. 659. 
Modelled in 1814, laid aside until 1835, when 
sold (RA Ledger, p. 189). See No. 777. 
779. Benjamin WEST PRA 
(1738-1820) 
61.7 cms. (height, including socle); 10.7 cms. 
(hcightofsoclc) 
Bust coated with whitewash, now grubby and 
flaking. Socle uncleaned and uncoated, A large 
repaired break bctwccn soclc and bust now loose. 
Name painted on socle. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 148; I.ane Poole, no. 660. 
Marbles in the Royal Academy and the 
National Portrait Gallery, I.ondon (607), both 
dated 1818. The latter was commissioned 
1817, completed 1818 (Potts, no.11, RA 
Ledger, p. 29); the former was exhibited 
Royal Academy 1818 (no.1104) and 
presented by the sculptor to the Academy 
(RA Ledger, p. 83). Both were based on the 
plaster model exhibited at the Royal Academy 
in 1811. West was President of the Royal 
Academy 1792-1820. He was one of the 
leading history painters in Britain. 
780. Robert Grosvenor, lst 
marquess of WESTMINSTER 
(1767-1847) 
79.9 cms. (height, including socle); 13.3 cms. 
(height of soclc) 
Uncleaned. Flaking, especially in drapery. An 
unusually red shellac on the face. Name painted on 
socle. 
Chantrey Sft, no. 149; Imc Poole, no. 661. 
Marble dated 1838 recorded at Eaton Hall, 
Chcshirc, by Gunnis. Commissioncd 1831, 
completed 1839, paid for 1842 (RA Ledger, 
p. 236). The marquess was one of the 
wealthiest men in Britain. 
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
781. REg WILLIAM IV 
(1765-1837) 
78,6 cms, (height, including socle); 13,3 cms, 
(height of soclc) 
Coated with whitewash, now grubby. 
Chantrey dft, no. 150; I.ape Poolc, no. 662. 
Marbles at Pcnshurst Place, Kent (dated 
1831 ); Buckingham Palace; Windsor Castle 
(dated 1837); the Goldsmith's Company 
(dated 1835); the Royal Academy (dated 
1841 ); Eton College. The Penshurst version 
commissioned 1829, exhibited Royal 
Academy 1831 (no.1190). Replica 
commissioned 1830 for the Goldsmiths' 
Company, completed 1835 (Potts, no. 3), 
another commissioned 1836 for Eton 
College, completed 1838, and paid for 1839 
(RA Ledger, p. 280). 
782. Horace Hayman WII.SON 
(1786-1860) 
78.6 cms. (height, including soclc); 13.6 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleancd. Proper left eyelid chipped. Name 
painted on soclc. 
Chantrey gift, no. 151; I.anc Poolc, no. 663. 
Commissioned 1835 for the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, Calcutta, completed 1837 (RA 
Ijedger, p. 272), exhibited Royal Academy 
1837 (no. 1286, specified as marble). Wilson 
was Professor of Sanskrit in the University of 
Oxford. 
783. Wflhian Hyde WOLIASTON 
(1766-1828) 
72.3 cms. (height, including socle); 12.9 cms. 
(height of §acle) 
Uncleaned. Name painted on soclc ( `W.H. 
Wollaston, M.D.'). Incised in the model on the 
back `F.C.' in a very cursive hand and `DIED 22. D£C. 
1828/WILLIAM HyDE WOLLASTON/M.D. V.P.RS.' 
Chantrcy Sft, no. 152; socle Label, no. 128; Ime 
Poole, no, 664. 
Commissioned 1829, completed 1830, paid 
for 1832 (RA Ledger, p. 221). Wollaston 
was a Fellow and Vice-Pre§idcnt of the Royal 
Society. 
782 
249
APPENDIX I PLASTER CASTS FROM THE STUDIO OF SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY 
784. William WORDSWORTH 
(1770-1850) 
57.5 cms. (height) 
Clcancd (to plaster) by Mohanmed Saleh. Points 
visible. 
Chantrey dft, no. 153; I-anc Poole, no. 665. 
Marble bust, dated 1822, Liby Library, 
University of Indiana, Bloomington. 
Commissioned by Sir George Beaumont 
1820, completed and paid for 1821 (RA 
Ledger, p. 118), exhibited Royal Academy 
1821 (no.1134). Potts, no.13. A plaster 
cast, presumably supplied by Chantrey, was 
in Scott's study at Abbots ford by 1832. By 
1822 Wordsworth enjoyed great fame as a 
poet, and by 1830 he was the most admired 
living British poet. 
785. Sir Jeffrey WYATVILLE RA 
(1766-1840) 
74.I cms. (height, including soclc); 13.8 cms. 
(height of socle) 
Uncleaned. Flaking extensively. Nanc painted on 
socle. 
Chantrey 5ft, no. 154; I.ane Poole, no. 666. 
Marble at Windsor Castle, dated 1837. 
Commissioned 1835, completed 1840 (RA 
Ledger, p. 274), exhibited 1837 (no. 1285). 
Wyatville was one of the most successful 
architects of his generation. 
250 
APPENDIX 11 
British Furniture in the Ashmolean Museum 
This list, unlike those for other schools, is not complete. Some 
of the chairs and tables-mostly modern ones, but also some 
which are old but commonplace-used by the Museum staff in 
their offices or by the invi$1ators in the galleries are not included. 
Also I have listed only a few of the display cases. With reluctance 
I have omitted the handsome gallery furniture commissioned or 
acquired by C. F. Bell-for instance, the six walnut bracketed 
wall cases (`slopes') used for the plaquettcs and medals and 
originally also for the miniatures; the walnut table supporting 
the brass-framed glass case at present containing the Hispano-
Morcsque ware; the six walnut curule chairs; and the oak sloping 
case now used for the display of drawings. Also noteworthy are 
the cases, of shedua and American black walnut, made in recent 
years by John Milncs for the drawings, the porcelain, and the 
textiles, and the walnut display cases on columnar supports made 
for the Hill couection of musical instruments in the 1930s 
previous to their donation to the Museum. 
This list, like those of furniture of other schools, docs not 
include frames, nor clock cases (although some of the English 
1. Court cupboard of walnut and other 
woods with lion and unicorn supporters. I,ate 
sixteenth century. Cat. No. 600. 
2. Octagonal table of oak with a single solid 
octagonal support ornamented with 
caryatids. Probably late sixteenth century in 
parts. Cat. No. 601. 
3. Small coffer of oak, the front and lid and 
spandrels carved with abstract patterns, 
`Edward Braye 1601' chiselled prominently 
on the front. No provenance recorded. A 
cutting from a sale catalogue gives 
Knaresborough Castle as source. Neither the 
ornamental carving nor the lettering look 
genuine in style: both were probably added 
to a coffer, probably of the sixteenth or 
seventeenth century, which was decorated 
only with notched comers. 
4. Chest of oak and walnut, carved with 
arcading and flutcd frieze. I.ate sixteenth 
century. No provenance recorded. The chest 
would oriSnally have been ornamented with 
stumpy pilasters supporting the arches. Its 
feet have also been cut down. It retains what 
may be origival pin hinges. 
5. Side table (`Credencc table') of oak with 
a hinged top, octagonal when open, carved 
with an arcaded frieze including fluting and 
ribbing between consoles, on five legs of 
ribbed baluster form (of which the back one 
long-case clocks are of lacquer and marquetry). Only one coin 
cabinet is listed here-the Combe cabinet which, like the Boulle 
medal cabinet and the Fitzwilliam p¢.Gfr¢ d#7i¢ cabinet (listed 
under French and Italian furniture), is on display outside the 
Heberden Coin Room. Other fine, if less ornamental, British 
coin cabinets arc preserved within the Coin Room itself. 
In making this list, I have made use of a shorter one compiled 
in 1970 by Paul Viney of Phillips, Oxford. I have received much 
advice on the earlier furniture from Edwin Willson. Ray Ansty 
and John Brazier have provided me with much help identifying 
the woods. 
The Sft of Elizabeth Mallctt in 1961 was made in memory 
of her parents Francis (himself a very notable benefactor) and 
Margaret. The bequest of Ijady Henriques in 1953 was made 
in memory of her son Brydges Henriques (1894-1915). The 
exact contents of the latter bequest arc unfortunately far from 
clear and to avoid future confusion I have included in parcnthcsis 
the corresponding descriptions in the lists made at the time. 
slides out to support the open top), the four 
fi.ont legs on a plinth with six bun feet (the 
back leg with its own bun foot). Early 
seventeenth century. Thought to have been 
presented by Elias Ashmolc in 1683. 
6. `Thrown Chair' of ash and oak with a 
triangular seat and a franc of numerous 
knobbly turned members. Perhaps early 
seventeenth century. No provenance 
recorded. Such chairs were collected by 
antiquaries from Horace Walpole onwards in 
the crroncous belief they were medieval. 
Many imitations were made in the last 
century. See C. Wainwright, 777c Roow¢##.c 
J#fGr¢.or (I.ondon and New Haven, Conn. , 
1989), 58-9. 
7. Chest of oak, decorated on the front with 
a band of geometric inlay of bog oak and 
holly in a dogtooth pattern framing three 
panels carved with geometric patterns within 
lozenges. Early to mid-seventeenth century. 
No provenance recorded. The feet have been 
cut down. 
8. Chest or cupboard of oak, the front 
panel, which is hinged at the top, framed by 
Ionic baluster pilasters, half pilasters also at 
the back of both sides, and front and sides 
richly carved with strapwork, acanthus, 
palmettes, etc. Early to mid-seventeenth 
century in style. No provenance recorded. 
The purpose of such a piece of furniture is 
not easy to explain and parallels are hard to 
find. It is probably a pastiche. 
9. Armchair of oak with a panel back, carved 
with stylized birds and trees francd with 
geometric inlay in holly and bog oak, the top 
rat with a scrolled crest, the downswept arms 
of square section, the other members (legs, 
front and side stretchers, and arm supports) 
all tuned, the legs on blqck feet. Mid to late 
seventeenth century and provincial in style. 
No provenance recorded. The top rail is a 
replacement. Brass plaque behind the back 
claims that the chair was the one in which 
`Clarke was murdered by Eugene Aran and 
Houseman on 7th or 8th of Jan. 1744 or 
1745, and purchased by Miss Denison 
afterwards Mrs Jackson of Huby, on the sale 
of the murdered man's effects at Knaresbro. ' 
The story of Aram, a considerable scholar, 
and his murder of Daniel Clark(c) is given 
undc[ Aram in tl\c Dictionary Of National 
Biograpky. 
10. Amchair of walnut with a cared seat and 
back panel, double-bind spiral legs and 
stretchers, columnar posts, slightly dipped 
moulded arms with some foliage at the 
scrolled front ends, the high front rail, top 
rail, and the franc of the back panel all of a 
flat foliate pattern a.1680. No provena.nce 
251
APPENDIX II BRITISH FURNITURE INTHE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM 
recorded. The chair is very similar to one 
stamped `R.P.' and attributed to Richard 
Price (a joiner documentcd as making caned 
twisted walnut chairs for the royal palaces 
c.1676-83) which is at Temple Ncwsam (C. 
aiNbert. Furniture at Temple Navsam House 
and IAitherton Hall (heeds, \978), i, no. 53), 
but the carving of no. 10 is less elaborate-without 
paw feet on the front legs, crowned 
finials to the posts or piercing in the scroll-work, 
for instance. 
I I . Armchair of ebohized walnut with a 
cancd seat and back panel, arms and front 
legs of scroued form, posts, arm supports, 
and stretchers of complex tuned baluster 
form, and front rail, top rail, and the frame 
of the back panel in the fom of flattened 
scrolls (the scrolls of the rails centred with a 
crown). c.1685. No provenance recorded. 
The chair is very simnar to a pair of chairs at 
Temple Newsan, one of which is stamped 
R 8. and attributed to RIchard Bealing, a 
supplier of walnut furniture to King William 
Ill (op. cit. under no. 10, i, no. 54; cf. also 
G. Wills, E"g/;ch F„roG.f#re 1550-1760 
(Ijondon,1971), 85, plate 68). 
12. Chest of drawers on a stand with short 
single-bind spiral legs and flat cross-scrolled 
stretchers, above bun feet; the mouldings and 
legs of walnut, the upper surface ornamented 
with a bold design of tulips and daffodils in 
marquetry of walnut, box, and stained bone 
on a field of ebony, fromed with walnut cross-banding, 
the drawer faces ornamented with 
oyster veneer of olive-wood for the most part 
(but another wood is employed on the central 
drawer). Ijatc scventccnth century. Elizabeth 
Malictt Sft, i96i. 
13. Display cabinet of figured walnut veneer 
over an oak carcass, on a stand of walnut; the 
cabinet with glazed doors each with four 
bevcllcd panes and a drawer in the pulvinated 
ffiezc above; the stand with one drawer on 
six single-bind spira.I legs with a flat scroucd 
cross-stretcher above bun feet. Late 
seventeenth century. Elizabeth Mallett dft, 
1961. 
14. Cabinet and chest of drawers of walnut, 
the doors of the upper case opening to reveal 
small drawers around a central cupboard, the 
lower case with two short and two long 
drawers; all visible surfaces vcncered: figured 
root walnut serving for mouldings and 
cornice and used in quarter-veneer patterns 
on all sides, burr walnut employed on the 
front doors froming panels of seaweed 
marquetry of a minute pattern of box on a 
walnut ground, the fficze of overlapping 
leaves of box, sand-scorched. c.1700. 
Elizabeth Mallett aft,1961. 
15. Centre table of walnut with seaweed 
marquetry on scrolled legs headed with 
252 
female heads supporting cushions. c.1700. 
Cat. No. 602. 
16. Rectangular chest of drawers, consisting 
of two small, above three long, drawers, the 
drawer faces of ash framed in cross-bending 
also of ash, with panels of `seaweed' 
marquetry of walnut on a ground of box, the 
upper surface of the chest inlaid with a 
geometrical pattern of walnut, satinwood, and 
mal`ogany. c.1700, parts probably later. No 
provenance recorded. 
17. High-back armchair of walnut with 
upholstered scat and splat ( both origivally 
cancd); cresting and splat franc carved with 
scrolls a.nd foliate ornament; posts of complex 
balustcr fomi headed with blocks carved with 
leaves; scrolling legs and arms ribbed and 
carved with ancanthus; the cross-stretchers of 
s-form with breaks centring on a finial. Early 
eighteenth century (or imitation of that 
period). No provenance recorded. 
18. Card table with a folding top and 
concertina action, the top rectangular but 
with curved comers, on straight turned legs 
headed with lappets and ending in club feet; 
the legs of solid laburnum, the closed top 
quarter-veneered in laburnum in a radial 
pattern with box and ebony stringivg, each 
rail veneered with laburnum, bookmatched, 
• the open top covered with green cloth but 
with the four candle circles veneered with 
laburnum and the four counter wells veneered 
with mahogany c.1720-5. Lady Henriques 
Bequest 1953 (listed as `Tiger-wood folding 
card tablet). A very similar card table is at 
Temple Newsam House, the chief difference 
being that it has legs of walnut (Gilbert, op. 
cit. under no. 10, i, no. 383). Another wa.s 
lot 73 at Christie's, I,ondon, 19 April 1990. 
19, Card table with a folding top and 
concertina action; the top of serpentine form 
with a small drawer above a small scrollcd 
apron, on cabriole legs, headed with shields, 
ending in club feet. The legs are of solid 
walnut, the rats of walnut veneer, the closed 
top of walnut quarter-veneered and framed 
with cross-banding, the open top covered 
with Pcf!.f Po;„f decorated with flowers, cards, 
and money, with candle circles veneered in 
walnut. c.1720-5. Given by Mrs W. R. F. 
Weldon, June 1935. 
20. High-back armchair with rectangular 
upholstered back and seat, and arm pads on 
the straight arms, downswept mahogany am 
supports, cabriole legs of mahogany with 
foliage carved at the knee, and claw and ball 
feet. Second quarter of the eighteenth 
century. No provenance recorded. 
21. Wall bracket of stepped form with a 
rectangular top, lacquered in gold and brown 
with a pattern of fanciful birds and diaper 
work, and heavily varnished. Second quarter 
of the eighteenth century. No provenance 
recorded. The bracket is at present employed 
to support the Cox Clock (Cat. No. 465). 
The top is an addition. 
22-23. Pair of massive armchairs of beech, 
Slded, with rectangular upholstered seats 
and backs and straight upholstered arms, the 
downswept arm supports and scroll front legs 
both carved with acanthus and linked rings 
on the chief face and with hatched scales on 
the side faces. Presumably designed by 
Wlilliam Kent for Hollcham Hall, Norfolk, 
seat of Thomas Coke, first earl of Leicester. 
Kent began to make designs for Holkhan in 
about 1730 and these chairs could have been 
made then but were more probably made 
later (the central block of the house not being 
complete until after 1750), very likely by 
Benjamin Goodison, the cabinet maker chiefly 
employed for the furnishing of Hollcham 
during the 1740s. By descnt in the Coke 
Family (having been removed from Holkham 
to Longford, Derbyshire) to Gerald Coke by 
whom presented in 1978 though the friends 
of the Ashmolean Museum. Similar chairs, 
but of mahogany, parcel gilt, remain at 
Holkham. A dctaled report on the traces of 
the original upholstery compiled by Heather 
Gilbey of the Victoria and Albcrt Museum in 
October 1978 is in the Department's 
archives. The green silk covering and brass 
nails date from the year of acquisition. 
24. Narrow dining-room side table of 
mohagany with a Vitruvian scroll frieze on 
the rails, on straight square legs. In the style 
of william Kent. c.1740. No provenance 
recorded. The legs have been lengthened. The 
long undecorated rail looks as if it orignally 
had attachments-probably posts to support 
a display gallery. 
25. Display cabinet in the form of a 
rectangular vitrine with a frame and stand of 
edlt pine combined with brown and ctlded 
lacquer, the cornice of beech, water-Blt, 
carved with acanthus, the cabriole legs, also 
of bccch, water-gilt, headed with acanthus 
and on pad feet, one drawer in the stand. 
Mostly Edwardian, but incorporating mid-eighteenth 
century fragments. J. F. Mallett 
Bequest, 1947. 
26-31. Set of six hall chairs of mahogany 
with saddle scats, each chair-back of a single 
piece of mahogany fanning out to a waved 
crest and pierced in a curling radial pattern, 
with ribs in each solid clement and the centre 
of the back a solid field of waved shape 
painted with the arms of Henry Rolle ( 1707- 
50), created Baron Rolle in 1747. The 
scrolled front legs have feet curled inwards in 
a line continuous with the pic[ced and 
scrolled front rail. Mid-eighteenth century. 
Presented in 1954 by the first earl of Halifax 
APPENDIX II BRITISH FURNITURE IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM 
KG, OM, Chancellor of the University 1933- 
59. The painfully crippled but sophisticated 
design is related to one published in R 
MaLr\warirSs Cabinet and Chairmaker's 
Real Friend and Companion (-hondon. 
1765). 
32. Tea table of mahogany, the square top 
with a spindle gallery and a pierced foliate 
fringe beneath the rail, on four legs, each a 
cluster of three slender straight turned shafts 
connected with block headings, block feet, 
and blocks for the thin chamfered cross-stretchers 
c.1760. A aft from the estate of 
Walter and Anne Stoye, 14 August 1978. 
Elements of this table are stylistically akin to 
those in both the Chinese and Gothic taste. 
33. Cheval firescreen of mahogany, with a 
panel of Soho tapestry (showing a vase of 
flowers, a spaniel, and a parrot) on one side 
and on the other a panel of needlework 
(showing a basket of flowers), the posts 
formed as octagonal Doric columns 
superimposed on turned Corinthian ones, 
supported by pairs of scroll legs. c.1760. 
Elizabeth Mallett Sft,1961. 
34. Bureau of rectangular form, the sloping 
drop front concealing eight large and eight 
small stepped drawers, the body beneath of 
four drawers (and no dummies) on straight 
and tapering legs with concave collars, the 
carcass of oak veneered in parquetry of burr 
elm and figured walnut. c.1770. Provenance 
unrecorded. 
35-36. Pair of console tables each with D-shaped 
top of satinwood veneer bordered 
with walnut cross-banding, supported by 
three scrolled legs of pine painted green and 
parcel gilt, carved with husks and acanthus, 
headed with blocks carved with lion heads in 
an Egyptian style, springivg from a shaped 
plihith with carved paterae on its projections 
and fluting in its concavities. c.1770. I.ady 
Henriques Bequest, in 1953 (`palr of pier 
glass console tables'). The tops may not be 
original. 
37-38. Pair of pedestals (candlestands) of 
satinwood veneer, with brass beading and 
thin ebony mouldings, the block above the 
tapering pier concave on each face, the 
tapering pier swept out at its foot to meet a 
rectangular plinth. c.1775. Bought in 1933. 
39. Boudoir table veneered with satinwood 
and walnut, with a galleried ledge on the 
serpentine top, a single drawer above a 
curving apron, and thin cabriole legs joined 
by a low shelf, the top concealing a mirror 
raised on a hinged flap. The top is decorated 
with a trophy of musical instruments, palm 
branch, bays, and shells in marquetry, the 
draw front decorated with parquctry, the legs 
decorated with marquetry ( now indistinct) of 
husks and scrolls. I.ate eighteenth century. 
I.ady Henriques Bequest, 1953 (`Writing-cum-
dressing table' ). 
40. Medal cabinet of rectangular form with 
massive brass carrying handles of loop form 
on each side, decorated with marquetry of 
sycamore, box, and varieties of walnut, a 
loosely garlanded urn represented on each 
door in an oval field framed with a chequer 
pattern band. The cabinet rests on a plain 
modern mahogany stand. Made for Dr 
Charles Combe ( 1743-1807). c.1775. 
Transferred from the Bodleian Library in 
1920. (Heberden Coin Room.) 
41. Hanging rectangular cupboard of 
mahogany containing an ivory crucifix within 
a gilt frame. Ijatc cightecnth century. Cat. 
No. 336 (for the ivory). 
42. Harlequin writing table, dressing table, 
and cupboard of rectangular form with 
tambour cupboard doors in the concave knee 
hole, on straight tapering legs; the closed top 
is of satinwood veneer with a border of walnut 
cross-banding and ropetwist strinalng of 
satinwood and ebony the front of quilted 
satinwood veneer, the tambour doors of 
plane and walnut. Late eighteenth century. 
Bequeathed anonymously,1951. A similar 
piece now at Temple Newsam House was 
published (when on loan there) by C. Gilbert 
•in the Jounal Of the Furniture History Society, 
2 ( 1966), 40-2 (`A Shearer Harlequin Table 
and its Design'), and again, with crucial 
additions, in his catalogue (op. cit. under no. 
10, ii, no. 429). Another such Harlequin table 
is at Althoap and others have appeared in the 
sale rooms. The model certainly existed by 
1779 when it was illustrated in Thomas 
Mdrf yon. s Compleat Treatise on PerspectiT}e. A\ 
drawing by London cabinet maker George 
Specr may represent the original design. Two 
designs also appeared in 777c C¢4;„ct M¢4Gr'j 
lo"do" Boo4 a/Pr}.ccf, first published I.ondon, 
1788, one of which is signed by Thomas 
Shearer. 
43. Harlequin dressing table and cupboard 
of mahogany veneer with stringivg of ebony 
and box, with one real and one dummy door, 
on straight tapering legs. I.ate eighteenth 
century. I.ady Henriques Bequest, 1953 
(`opening dressing table' ). 
44. Settee of beech with a cared seat, the 
back and ams in the form of a Gothic arcade, 
on straight, turned, tapering legs, the frame 
lacquered black with a band of yellow, 
running foliage painted in green on the top 
rail, a yellow guilloche pattern painted on the 
seat rail. Perhaps Henriqucs Bequest, 1953 
(it corresponds exactly with no item in any 
list). 
45. Oval card table with folding top, on 
straight tapering legs with block feet, the 
closed D-shaped top of satinwood veneer with 
a border of pale walnut cross-bending, 
another parallel band of cross-banding in the 
centre, stringing and marquetry of paterac 
and of flowers and husks in fine scgmental 
swags, of box and sycamore with some 
penwork and green staining, the open top 
covered with blue felt, the legs headed with 
triglyphs in marquetry, the rall's frieze also 
decorated with oval patcrac. I.ate eighteenth 
century. Lady Hcnriques Bequest, 1953. 
46. large oval card table with folding top, 
on straight fluted tapering legs with reeded 
necks, the closed D-shaped top of figured 
satinwood vcnecr with a border of tulipwood 
crbss-banding and a parallel border of the 
same defining a central D-shaped zone 
decorated with floral marquetry of sycamore 
and some penwork against a ground of yellow 
vanish, the open top covered with green 
baize, the rail of satinwood veneer, the block 
heading each leg decorated with floral 
marquetry in an oval field, the legs of 
satinwood. Irdte eighteenth century. Iady 
Henriques Bequest, 1953 (`Large oval 
folding table' ) . 
4748. Pair of comer cupboards of 
mahogany, the upper stages with four shelves 
and glazed doors with crossing bars. I.ate 
eighteenth century. I.ady Henriques 
Bequest, 1953. 
49. Ijarge breakfront bookcase and bureau 
of mahogany with a flutcd ffieze intcrruptcd 
by rosettes below a comicc of miniature 
`Gothic' spandrel arches, the upper stage with 
adjustable shelves and six glazed doors with 
crossing bars, the lower stage on the sides 
with panelled doors containing cupboards 
above drawers in the plinth, and in the centre 
with a pair of cupboard doors with oval panels 
beneath a large drawer which opens to reveal 
pigeon holes and drawers, its front dropping 
to form a writing surface. The glazed doors 
and the cupboard doors are framed with 
mahogany cross-banding in a radial pattcm, 
the panels in the cupboards are of curl veneer 
symmetrically disposed, all this veneer being 
of fine Cuban mahogany. IAte eighteenth 
century. I.ady Henriques Bequest, 1953 
(`Bureau bookcasc' in one list, `Mahogany 
breakfront case' in another, apparently 
originally allocated to the `Museun of 
OrientalArt'). 
50. Work table with a concealed cabinet of 
drawers on a spring mechanism, the top with 
concave sides, the projecting corners 
chamfercd, incorporating a rectangular tray 
which lifts when the rectangular cabinet 
springs up, on straight tapering legs with 
casters. The top is quarter-veneered in 
coromandel in a radial pattern around the 
tray which is decorated with marquetry 
representing two books (of wenge and 
253
APPENDIX II BRITISH FURNITURE IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM 
sycamore) against an oval field (of satinwood), 
contained by spandrels (of burr walnut), the 
concealed spring veneered with mahogany 
with tulipwood cross-banding. Late 
eighteenth or early nineteenth century. I.ady 
Henriques Bequest, 1953 (`Table inlaid with 
twovolumes'). 
51-57. Suite of a settee, four side chairs, and 
two armchairs of pale wood (not beech but 
possibly satin walnut) with caned splats and 
seats, each rectangular splat connected with 
the rails above and below by circles, the back 
frames themselves rectangular, the seats 
rounded in front, fine tuned baluster arm 
supports, tuned tapering front legs with 
cross-stretchers. The wood is decorated with 
painted dark brown lines in imitation of inlay 
stringing. I,ate eighteenth or early nineteenth 
century. Lady Henriques Bequest, 1953 (in 
one list said to be of rosewood, in another 
list described as including six side chairs-
perhaps because the pair of chairs histed below 
was carelessly associated with the suite). 
58-59. Pair of armchairs of pale wood (not 
beech but possibly satin walnut) with two 
cared rails across the rectangular back and 
with rectangular caned seats, downswept 
arms, straight front tapering legs. The wood 
is decorated with blue painted lines in 
imitation of inlay stringing. Irate eighteenth 
or early nineteenth century. I.ady Henriques 
Bequest,1953 ( satinwood and canework 
armchairs' in one list, in another list possibly 
incorporated in the suite described above). 
60ndl. Pair of armchairs of beech with 
rectangular caned backs and seats, 
downswept amis, and splayed turned front 
legs, the frame painted black and decorated 
with coloured flowers. Early nineteenth 
century. I,ady Henriques Bequest, 1953 
(presumably the `palr of painted armchairs' 
mentioned in one list). 
62-64. Set of three side chairs of beech with 
rectangular caned seats, with pierced cross 
rails on the backs, on splayed tuned front 
legs, the frame lacquered in initation of 
rosewood (now mostly blackened) with a 
floral pattern in gold. Early nineteenth 
century. Perhaps I,ady Henriques Bequest, 
1953 (possibly the `pair [fz.c] of amchalrs 
[J¢.c] lacquered in the Chinese manner', unless 
this is taken to refer to the pair described 
above.- possibility increased by the fact that 
the description docs not appear on the same 
list as the `pair of painted armchairs'). 
65. Partner's writing table of rectangular 
fom on four straight tapering legs with one 
large central drawer flanked by two shorter 
drawers on each long side stepped to 
accommmodatc knees. The top covered with 
green baize, other surfaces veneered with 
mahogany, each drawer face framed with 
254 
coromandcl cross-banding and box stringing. 
Oridnal brass loop handles. I,ady Henriques 
Bequest, 1953. 
66nd7. Pair of hall tables with frames and 
console-shaped supporters of mahogany with 
green porphyry tops. Designed by Thomas 
Hope, c.1805. Cat. Nos. 522-3. 
68-71. Set of four low chairs of figured ash 
with deeply curved top rails, scrolled, bowed, 
and pierced lyre-shaped splats, downswept 
posts, drop-in upholstered seats, and sabre 
legs. The legs, top rails, and posts are of solid 
wood, the splats and seat rails veneered, the 
splats and top rails inlaid with mahogany in a 
pattern of geometric flower-heads, 
honeysuckle, and scrolling lines. Probably 
designed by Thomas Hope, c.1805. Bought 
at the Deepdene sales, 1917, Ijot 919 
(together with a rosewood fircscreen ). 
72. Sofa table of mahogany with two flaps, a 
drawer at each end, on a single bulbous 
baluster rising from a plinth with four 
downswept legs with ribbed upper surfaces 
terminating in brass foliate feet with casters. 
Early nineteenth century. Lady Henriques 
Bequest, 1953 (`Mahogany pedestal table 
with side drops'). 
73. Massive sideboard with a gallery on two 
pairs of cabriole legs with paw feet, of 
mahogany--with mahogany venccr (on the 
upper surface ) and some ebonized mahogany 
mouldings ornamented with ormolu wreaths. 
c.1810. One of a pair from Gloucester 
House, Park Lane (residence of the duke of 
Cambridge). I,ady Henriques Bequest, 1953. 
74-75. Pair of hall tables consisting of 
console-shaped supports of walnut with 
rosewood veneer supporting slabs of Anglesey 
porphyry. c.1820-30. Cat. Nos. 612-13. 
76. Tripod table with coromandcl veneer and 
Slt metal mounts supporting a circular 
specimen marble table top from the workshop 
of Michelangelo Barberi. c.1855. Cat. No. 
10 (for the table top). 
77. Rectangular wardrobe of deal entirely 
painted on the exterior; two doors, that to 
proper right of two leaves, hinged; the other 
door of one leaf; a notched cornice; the doors 
fromed with engaged angular shafts on heavy 
moulded feet formed as inverted Gothic 
corbels. The doors are painted by Edward 
Bume-Jones ( 1833-98) with scenes from 
`The Priorcss's Tale' by Chaucer 
incorporating repeated portraits of Jane 
Burden (later Mrs Morris) as the Virgin Mary 
and her angelic escort and a dedication by 
the artist to William Morris. The interiors of 
the doors are decorated with unfinished 
figure paintings and decorative patterns by 
Morris himself. Bequeathed in 1939 by Miss 
May Morris, but first placed on loan by Jane 
Morris in 1901 (it had previously been on 
loan to the South I.ondon Art Gallery, 
Camberwell Road). Mrs Morris declared it 
to be her intention to bequeath the wardrobe 
to the Ashmolean in a letter of 2 March 1901 : 
she also claimed that it had been presented to 
her husband and herself `on the occasion of 
our marriage'. This has been repeated ever 
since and it has also been claimed that the 
piece was designed by Philip Webb for the 
couple's first marital home, The Red House. 
But the wardrobe is inscribed to Morris only, 
it is also of poor material, evidently 
improvised in construction, which is 
impossible in a work designed by Webb, and 
it is more likely to be of an earlier date and 
one of the pieces of furniture made by Morris 
and Bume-Jones for their rooms in Red Lion 
Square in 1857. 
78. Bookcase of oak, carved and gilt and 
painted, of architectural character with gabled 
roofs and a colummar gallery, designed by 
William Burges (1827-81) and made for his 
rooms in Buckingham Street, I.ondon, 
between 1856 and 1862. It was exhibited in 
the Medieval Court of the International 
Exhibition in the latter year, but was damaged 
and altered in 1878. `The largest piece of 
Burges's furniture and unrivalled for the 
richness and profusion of its decoration' 
(-Mary Airon in The Strange Genius Of 
Wj%¢eeB„7g:gGf(NationalMuseumofwales, 
Cardiff,1981), no.136, p. 75). The paintings 
are all of subjects connected with art, taken 
from both Christian and pagan legends, and 
are by E. S. Poynter, N. H. S. Westlake, E. 
Burne-Jones, Simeon Soloman, C. Rossiter, 
Thomas Rossitcr, Thomas Morten, Albert 
Moore, Frederick Small field, W. F. Yeames, 
W. Weekes, S. A. Fitzgerald, and H. Stacy 
Markes. Purchased in 1933 by Kenneth Clark 
(who acknowledged in the A»7?"¢/ Rcporf 
that it was `not acceptable to present day 
taste'). Placed on loan at Knightshayes. 
Devon (the National Trust), in 1954. 
79. Cabinet for framed drawings, of 
mahogany in two stages crowned by a plain 
pediment, the doors of the upper stage of 
glass, smaller glass doors in the lower stage, 
a shelf between the two stages (the lower 
being deeper). Designed by John Ruskin for 
the collection he gave to the University in the 
l880s. The Department of Antiquities also 
retains the similarly plain mahogany cabinets 
given to Ruskin by his parents when he was 
an undergraduate to house his collections of 
eggs and minerals-these are now employed 
for Near Eastern seals and Graeco-Roman 
seals. 
80-81. Pair of rectangular display cases 
framed in walnut on elaborate stands of 
carved walnut; each stand with a frieze of 
scrolls and flowers centring in a boy's head 
APPENDIX II BRITISH FURNITURE IN THE ASHMOLEAN MUSEUM 
in a glory; the cabriole legs carved with 
drapery, husks, horizontal fluting, and 
acanthus, headed with boys' busts, on claw 
and ball feet which are connected with 
scrolling stretchers carved with acanthus and 
fluting centring on a vase. Early nineteenth 
century, inspired by French seventeenth 
century models. J. F. Mallett Bequest, 1947. 
82. A rectangular table display case, the 
glazed top framed in moulded brass, the 
frieze of cross-banded walnut with ebony 
stringing and a border of pale walnut, on 
square straight tapering legs with cross-stretchers 
of bow form, also of a pale walnut. 
Early nineteenth century. 
83. A rectangular upright display case of 
figured walnut; the principal case rising above 
another of sloped desk-form; supported on 
seven octagonal tapering legs carved with 
Ionic capitals, reeded necking, and acanthus 
leaves united with a flat scrolled stretcher 
below which are bun feet; three of the legs 
are at either end and at the centre of the front 
of the cabinet, two at either end of the back, 
and two at intermediary points between the 
first centre leg and the two back legs. Early 
nineteenth century. J. F. Mallett Bequest, 
1947. 
84. A rectangular display case of brass, of 
three divisions, with five doors, made by the 
firm of Mantelet, supported by a wooden base 
with low cupboards, the three doors of which 
arc of modern Chinese cut lacquer with 
figures against a black background. Early 
nineteenth century. J. F. Mallett Bequest, 
1947. Mallett also possessed two other 
similar but smaller cabinets, according to the 
inventory of his collection. 
85. A rectangular upright display case of 
mahogany, on eight square tapering legs 
connected with a flat-shaped stretcher; the 
pilaster strips framing the case, the frieze, and 
the legs with herringbone cross-banded 
veneer in recessed panels; the central front 
leg and the centre of the frieze of a different, 
darker, wood (probably rosewood); ormolu 
foliate feet and foliate collars on each of the 
front four legs and ormolu rectangularly 
framed rosettes on their heading blocks. 
Gaspard Oliver Farrer Bequest, 1946. The 
splendid art bronze foliate handle of the key 
to this case is, perhaps, original seventeenth 
century work. 
86-87. Pair of columnar pedestals carved 
with cherubim and large scrolls and acanthus. 
Probably early twentieth century but in a 
Renaissance style. Provenance unrecorded. 
88. A rectangular upright bookcase; with two 
glazed doors and inverted Gothic corbel feet; 
the mouldings, glazing bars, and massive 
shaped feet of solid rosewood; the walls all 
of dark oak; the adjustable shelves of oak; the 
displayed hinges and the handles of stamped 
brass, gilded. A copy of a bookcase made by 
Ernest Gimson in 1913, which is now in the 
Holboum of Menstrie Museum, Bath, 
commissioned for his private use by C. F. 
Bell, Keeper of the Department of Fine Art 
( 1908-31 ), from Peter Waals ( 1870-1937) 
and completed for him in 1926. Bought in 
1972 from the collection of Charles and 
Iravinia Handley-Read. 
89. Table of Brazihian mahogany made to 
support a brass-framed glass vitrine (made by 
Messrs Sage) with fretted spandrels and 
straight legs on blocked feet. The recesscd 
panels of ffieze and legs are veneered with 
quilted macaree framed with ebonized 
mahogany beading, the ffieze in both long 
sides is centred on a marquetry representation 
of a glass bowl in sycamore and rosewood on 
an oval field of quilted macaree. Made in 
1989 by Ray Ansty of the Museum workshop; 
commissioned in 1988 by Christopher 
Shephard for the Museum's collection of 
Venetian glass. 
90. A pair to No. 89 made by Mr Ansty in 
1991. 
91. A Rectangular tabletop of satinwood 
with rounded comers, decorated with pen 
and brush in indian ink under hard varnish 
with a central panel of the three Graces within 
six omanental bands of dense foliage. 
Colonial or provincial work. Presented by Mr 
K. D. Gloag and Miss Gloag from the estate 
of Mrs Gloag of 8, Northmoor Road, 
Oxford. Set on a mahogany baluster support 
with three downswept feet made by Ray 
Ansty in 1988. 