443 and 444. Pair of door-handles 
in the form of fishes 
11.2 cms. (length of each handle) 
Brass, highly polished but the backplates against the walnut door 
frames with a dark brown natural patina. 
Attached to, probably made for, and possibly designed for, the 
walnut panelled interior doors of the Hill Music Room, which were 
designed 1938 and completed 1939. 
In July 1936 Alfred Hill of the firm ofwilliam E. Hill and 
Sons, then of 140 New Bond St, approached the Vice-
Chancellor with the idea of presenting to the University the 
celebrated collection of early musical instruments which he 
had formed with the help of his brother Arthur. The Curators 
of the Bodleian Library had decided by early 1937 that they 
could not find a suitable space, but the Ashmolean Museum 
was interested and had allocated the Sladc lecture room to 
receive the collection by the summer of 1937 (a new lecture 
room was created below the Draper's Gallery, then being 
planned). In October Alfred Hill first suggcstcd Allom as 
architect for the conversion of the room. Hc did so on the 
recommendation of F. H. H. Romaine Walker who was too 
ill to take on the job himself. Allom was the `leading decorator 
here and in New York'-also a noted yachtsman and golf-playcr. 
Hill's first idea was for a panelled `Georgian' room 
and Romaine Walker had dreamt of recreating the setting of 
an eighteenth-century conversation piece, but Allom, whose 
designs were probably made after the official acceptance of 
the gift in June 1938, wanted to create something Italian for 
what was a largely Italian collection. The plaster frieze which 
he supplied, consisting of shields set in scallopcd tondi and 
swags between with dainty fluttering ribbons, has a Florcntinc 
quattrocento flavour. Nothing remains of his original colour 
scheme except the remarkably accomplished imitation of pc7ide 
¢"f¢.co for the skirting, but origivally the door frame, and 
perhaps other features, were coloured to resemble P¢.e£7t¢ 
Jcye"¢. The design of the door frame caused considerable 
acrimony. Allom wanted to give it a pediment inspired by one 
on the Pazzi Chapel. Parker felt that this was inappropriate 
and the Kcepcr of the Museum, E. T. Leeds, put the case 
against the pediment in a letter to Allom of 5 October. Allom 
replied with assurances of his extensive study of Italian art: `1 
know I am right'-nd moreover Mr Hill liked his door. 
Cockerell's architecture was Greek, Allom was reminded. But 
Allom was able to point out that Cockcrell's work had many 
Italian Renaissance features. By the end of the month the 
Visitors had rcjccted the pediment. The door itself is a 
handsome if conventional design and made of splendidly 
figured walnut. The stylized dolphin-like fish used for the 
entirely modern handles were as popular in Greece in the fifth 
and fourth centuries BC as in Italy in the fifteenth and 
sixteenth centuries AD. They would certainly have met with 
Cockcrell's approval and seem not to have excited any 
disapproval within the Museum. But then the war interrupted 
the whole debate and by the time the Room was officially 
opened in 1950 Allom was dead.
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Galizia foundry, Chatficld Road, Battersea, Ijondon 
After Kenneth ARMITAGE CBE (b. 1916) 
@@PROCESS
445. The Bed 
11.8 cms. (height); 21.4 cms. (length) 
Bronze with a uniform black patina. I.ost-wax cast, the fuller foms 
open below. Incised in the model at the lower edge of the taller 
vertical element `2/6' and `65 KA'. 
From the collection of Christophcr Hewett ( 1938-83) given to the 
Museum by his family in June 1985 and included in the exhibition 
celebrating the dft held in the MCAlpine Gallery in January and 
February 1987 (no.12 in the catalogue). A charcoal drawing and a 
photo-etching by Armitage were also included in the gift to the 
Museum. Three drawings and two sculptures by him from Hcwctt's 
collection were presented at the same time to the Henry Moore 
Centre for the Study of Sculpture at Leeds City Art Gallery. 
Armitage had exhibited at Hewett's Taranman Gallery in 1982. 
The sculptor explained that this sculpture origivated in the 
spectacle of a friend crossly burying her head under the bcd-linen, 
thus inadvertently exposing her buttocks. `Thcre were 
two different versions of this tiny piece but similar in size. 
Thcrc was also a very much bigger version in white fibre-glass.' 
It was cast in an edition of six in 1965. The theme of 
combining human forms with furniture is found in other more 
recent work by Armitage such as his three bronze Cf7¢¢.7tf (of 
1981; nos.1-3 in the Taranman exhibition of 1982, where 
au arc mustrated). 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Perhaps after Thomas BANKS ( 1735-1805) 
@@PROCESS
446. Contemplation (Pudicitia) 
42 cms. (height including integral base of 2.4 cms.) 
Plaster. White discoloured to grey. Hollow cast. Some small chips 
missing from head and back of base. The hollow containing a label 
inscribed in pen `Presented by the Misses Bullock-Webster 1916' 
and the base itself pasted with two paper labels inscribed in pen in 
a hand of c.1900 `Contemplation. / modelled by / Thomas Banks. 
RA. Sculptor/Born 1735 Died 1805' and `a friend of gt. 
grandfather / and mother Edward & Rachel Webster / and given to 
them by him / with other models and medallions / which were not 
kept.' (The name is not certainly Webster.) 
Given by the Misses Bullock-Webster,1916 (A""#¢/ RcPo# ( 1916), 
14). 
The plaster came to the Museum under the Kccpership of 
C. F. Ben who claimed Banks as a forebear and was probably 
already collecting the material on him which he would 
eventually publish (more out of antiquarianism and piety than 
any high estimate of the sculptor's ability) as A»»¢/f a/T77oov¢f 
Bo»fu (Cambridge,1938). And yet in that volume no mention 
is made of this statuette. Bell recognized that it was a cast of 
a furly accurate copy of the portrait statue in the Vatican 
Collection known as the £¢.pG.a A4:¢#G¢. or P#dG.c¢.f¢.a and much 
esteemed in the eighteenth century (see F. Haskcll and N. 
Penny, T¢#G ¢»d £4G A„f¢.g#c (Ijondon and New Haven, 
Conn.,1981), 300-I) and he may therefore have dismissed 
the legend that it was by Banks. And yet some connection 
with him is likely. It might merely be a cast of a copy by 
someone else which was in the sculptor's studio, but that 
Banks was interested by the figure is probable, especially 
when we consider his paraphrase of other notable antique 
figures for the captives around the pedestal of the monument 
to Captain Richard Rundell Burgess in St Paul's (the model 
for which was exhibited in 1802). And that he did make 
reduced and modified copies after the antique is demonstrated 
by the medallions of A4lo#g¢.„g and EPG"¢.„g commissioned 
from hin by Sir John Soane for the pendentivcs of the ceihng 
of the Old Dividend Office in the I.othbury Court of the 
Bank of England (now dcstroycd) which were based on 
terracotta versions which he is said to have made in Rome 
and which arc now in Sir John Soane's Museum (Bell, op. 
cit. 147). Indeed the latter may well be connected with the 
`models and mcdallions' mentioned on the old label. The 
ways in which the plaster differs from the antique marble are 
compatible with Banks's taste: the figurc's right hand is drawn 
closer into her drapery, the hair and diadem are altered, the 
veil falls more softly over her left shoulder, and there are 
adjustments to the length of drapery falling in front of her 
left arm. 
\
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
Unknown foundry 
After Gilbert William BAYES ( 1872-1953) 
@@PROCESS
447. Sigurd 
71.9 cms. (height of bronze group); 36 cms. (length of integral 
bronze plinth); 27 cms. (width of bronze plinth); 17.4 cms. 
(height of marble block); 44.4 cms. (length of marble block); 
28.2 cms. (width of marble block); 99.5 cms. (height of wooden 
pedestal); 81 cms. (length of wooden pedestal); 43 cms. (width 
of wooden pedestal) 
Bronze with a dark brown patina deliberately worn to a golden 
brown in some areas in relief (such as the dragon on his saddle-cloth 
and the helmet ornament), with some blue and green enamel 
in champleve fields of the saddle-cloth and bridle. Hollow cast, by 
the sand-cast method, in pieces. The plinth was cast separately and 
its underside reveals, at the points of contact with the three hoofs, 
the iron armature inside the cast of the horse. The rider and horse 
were cast separately, as were the parts of the bridle and saddle-cloth 
decorated with enamel. In the case of the saddle-cloth this is only 
apparent at the points of contact with the horse's back legs and the 
hero's feet. The reins and sword strap of pliable copper are added. 
The latter has been broken off: the rivet originally attaching it to 
the flapping cloak remains. `GILBERT BATES / 1910' is chiselled in 
the bronze across the corner of the plinth by the horse's back right 
hoof. In raised letters of `Lombardic' form around the four sides of 
the plinth is the following text: `He . who . would . win . to /the . 
Heavens . & . bc . as . the . Gods . on . high/ must . tremble . 
nought . at . /the . road . & . the . place . where . men . folk . 
die'. The bronze plinth is mounted on, but unsecured to, a marble 
block decorated with panels in sunk relief with some gilding now 
mostly worn off, chipped, scratched, discoloured with dirt and with 
red paint. This block is, in turn, mounted on, but unsccured to, a 
wooden pedestal, painted to resemble stone, decorated with panels 
in sunk relief. Above the higher ffieze of figures on one side arc the 
names `BRyNHILD . GRIMHILD . GUDRUN' with the text above the 
lower frieze: `AND . LO . THE . HoPE . oF . THE . PEol>LE ; THE 
DAys . oF . A . KING . ARE . BEGUN' and on the opposite side 
`GUNNAR', `HOGNI', `GOGGORM', on the banners held by the warriors 
in the higher frieze. The painting on the pedestal is generally 
discoloured with dirt and is also flaking. The separate wooden 
elements are dividing where formerly glued and are also splitting. 
Bequeathed by the Revd J. W. R Brocklebank in 1927. Acquired by 
him in 1910 in substitution for an earlier cast of the same figure 
(see below). The pedestal had been completed in March 1910 and 
the marble base made in June in the previous year. No. I on Andrew 
Shirley's receipt of January 1927. 
S¢j#7i¢ was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1909 (as 
no.1834, S¢j"7i¢-eg#ctrr¢.¢7? f£#f#c#G, 47io7£2;e). Bayes had 
made his reputation with sculpture of horses and his interest 
in Nordic mythology had been evident as carly as 1894 when 
he exhibited 777c r¢.dc a/£¢G V¢/ky7p¢.cf at the Royal Academy. 
S¢j#7:¢ is the hero of the E/¢Gy E¢de, a source made available 
to the educated public of that period by William Morris's 
vcrstror\, The Story Of Sigurd the Volsung. Here. he tildes Grey 
Fell (Sft of Odin), holding aloft the maric sword Gram or 
Wrath, having slain the dragon Fafhir. The dragon is 
represcntcd on his helm-crest and saddle-cloth. The Branstock 
tree, emblematic of the Volsung dynasty, is represcntcd in 
enamel on the saddle-cloth. 
Brocklebank offered £150 (presumably the asking price) 
for the bronze on 17 June 1909 probably as soon as he saw 
it and Bayes promptly rcplicd accepting this offer on 18 June. 
This reply is the first of a series of letters from him to 
Brocklebank which survive in the Department's archive. 
Brocklcbank, doubtless realizing that the bronze needed to 
be seen from all sides, and was, with its marble base, too large 
and heavy to be placed on any existing piece of furniture, 
asked the sculptor to design a pedestal for it. On 30 June 
Bayes thanked Brocklebank for his cheque, observed that the 
last day of the Academy exhibition is `always the Aug. Bank 
Hohday', and concluded, `1 shall be roughing out the sketch 
for the base shortly 8c will send it up to you.' On 17 August 
he wrote, apologizing that the bronze had not returned from 
the Academy when he left town but he expected to bc in 
I.ondon the following week and, as soon as he had made `a 
note of the carving on the marble and the colour scheme, so 
that the pedestal may bc in keeping with them', hc would 
have the group packed up and sent. `In the meantime I enclose 
a sketch of what I propose. The carving on it is very simple 
incised carving with colour introduced into the deep sunk 
background of the reliefs 8c patterns.' 
Brocklebank was obviously impatient and a lcttcr from 
Baycs dated 25 August apolodzcs for the delay and promises 
to dispatch the group on 27 August; then one of 27 August 
apolodzes for it not being sent owing to a misunderstanding 
but assures Brocklcbank that it will go first thing tomorrow. 
`1 have had the marble 8c bronze packed separately as being 
safer, the screw, nut, & stcading pin being packed with the 
marble.' He added that `1 hope you received the sketch design 
for the wooden pedestal that I sent you from abroad. Will 
you let mc have it back when you have decided how you hke 
it.' It is possible that Brocklebank was irritated by the delay 
for Bayes wrote on 6 September expressing the hope that the 
group had arrived safely, not having heard that it had done 
so (a courtesy he would certainly have expected). In the next 
letter of 24 February 1910 Baycs sincerely regrets `having 
been so long upon the ``Sigurd" base but a number of 
un-expected things turned up in connection with it' and 
concludes that he hopes to send it within the month. On 15 
March he announced that he was sending it on the following 
evening. 
I have lost all sense of the wood er given it a `granulated' surface as 
you suggested erhave kept the top panels low in tone to lead up 
to the bronze. 
In the front of the base the upper panel represents the three 
Niblung brothers Gunnar, Hogni, 8c Guttom; the relief below, 
`the funeral of Sigurd'. 
On the back are the three women Blynhild, Grimhild 8c Guchm 
who had played the most important part in the life of Sigurd. 
Below is the child Sigurd being taken to RIng Elf to be named, 
with an inscription above `and lo, the hope of the people, the days 
ofa king are begun'. On the capitals are the ravens of odin `Thought' 
er'`Speech'. 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
You will find the base so solidly constructed that it will need no 
further weighting, in fact I found it an advantage to have casters. 
I trust you understand how sorry I am to have kept you waiting 
so long, but each stage, the making, carving, gilding c?colouring 
ran into more time that I had anticipated. 
There was, it sccms, no reply to this from Brocklebank who 
was perhaps again irritated by the delay and also by the bill 
for £50 which may have accompanied Bayes's letter. `1 have 
been hoping to hear from you as to whether you like the base 
8c if the colouring suits the room', wrote Bayes on 3 April 
with a brevity that surely also imphed that he expected 
payment. On 12 April he wrote as follows: 
I am in receipt of yours givam glad to hear that you think the base 
suits the `Sigurd' very well. 
It is unfortunate that you think it expensive at £50 as it shows 
that the measure of your appreciation docs not equal the amount 
of work and thought I have expended upon it. 
I should myself have liked to add side panels but as it was costing 
me up to the amount you wished to pay, I had reluctantly to 
abandon the idea. You are probably wanting a base with much less 
thought & labour 8[ would prefer to spend a lesser sum upon it. 
In that case now that a suitable base has been thought out could 
not your local joiner, that you mentioned, make an inexpensive one 
for you leaving out the art? Doubtless a second one made from that 
which is already thought out could be made more cheaply for you. 
The price I had to pay for mine would astonish you I can see from 
your letter. 
If you decide to have a less expensive one, would you be good 
enough to let me have mine back at your earliest convenience as I 
will make use of it myself. 
This worked, and on 20 April Bayes wrote thanking 
Brocklcbank for his 
letters & cheque, & expression of appreciation of `Sigurd'. I hope 
as time goes on the base will further increase your liking of the 
work as a whole. Should it not I will exchange it for a statuette. 
I was glad to have your assurance that I had removed any doubts 
you might have had as to my straightforwardness in the matter & 
shall be glad to show you the work I have in my studio when you 
care to pay me a visit. 
I did not take much care of the little water colour sketch during 
the construction of the base & damaged it while making a couple 
of clay models from it. 
In the meantime Bayes had made a revised version of the 
group and this was exhibited at the Royal Academy (no. 1913, 
Sigurd-Statuette, bron2;e and enunel). In the oritrnal S±g\ird 
had held aloft the ring Andvaranant which Fafiiir had guarded. 
In this version hc held his sword. Brocklcbank considered this 
alteration to be an improvement. `1 will have a photograph 
of Sigurd 11 sent off tomorrow', Bayes wrote to him on 18 
June 1910. 
It is not a very good one but was taken at the last moment before 
the bronze was sent off to the Academy. I am interested to hear 
you like the alteration but regret it should make you jealous. 
Would you care for me to have a fourth cast made similar to the 
Academy one and let you have it in place of yours? 
Bayes could not offer the cast on exhibition at the Academy 
because it had been purchased under the terms of the 
Chantrey Bequest for the Tate Gallery (no. 2739-reserve 
collection). 
An undated letter of either late June or early July informed 
Brocklebank that he was thinking of having another cast made 
of S¢j"%¢ `for the Rome International next year Cr as I 
gathered from your letter that this year's Sigurd was the 
favourite I am willing to have an extra cast made for you giv 
send the one you now have to the Exhibition. There will be 
no extra expense involved a this arrangement will I think 
please you better.' 
Evidently Brocklebank agreed to this proposal and on 5 
July Bayes explained that it would be thrcc or four months 
before the exchange could be arranged. On 29 October he 
explained that the marble base need not bc sent (so this can 
be dated to 1909) and also that the new cast might take a few 
days more than anticipated `as one of the smaller enamels has 
bccn troublesome and requires a fresh piece casting'. The 
bronze was no. 1078 in the British Section of the 
International Fine Arts Exhibition. 
An additional letter by Bayes concerning the group survives 
in the Department's archives dated 19 December 1927 in 
response to an enquiry concerlring the sculpture by Andrew 
Shirley. Bayes cxplaincd that Brocklebank's bronze was a 
replica of the Chantrey purchase now in the Tate Gallery 
which was exhibited in 1910 but adding the information that 
the `wooden pedestal was executed for Mr Brocklebank-the 
following year'. It was in fact cxccuted for him in the year 
following his purchase of the 1909 Academy version, as we 
have seen. The whole business is made more confusing by 
the fact that the most accessible published illustration of 
SGj#71¢ is fig. 197, pl. CVII, of Herbert Maryon's A4lodG" 
Sc#/Pfz¢7.c (I.ondon,1933), in which a bronze of the first type 
is captioned as being in the Tate Gallery. On the whole the 
first type-with the ring-seems to have been the most 
popular and scvcral casts of it are known: one, formerly 
belonging to Sir George Frampton, was with the Armstrong-
Davis Gallery in Arundel, Sussex, in 1985 (when illustrated 
in an adrcrtisemer[t in the National Art-Collections Fund 
Rcp¢.ew), one was sold at Sotheby's, I.ondon, 12 April 1985 
(lot 257), one remains in the Bayes family collection, and 
another is in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. Something 
of the reputation which the sculpture enjoyed for its complex 
dynamism (which provides a link between the New Sculpture 
and the angular realism of H. S. Jagger) is conveyed by 
Maryon's praise: `probably no other equestrian group extant 
. . . would better repay a prolonged study of its composition'. 
7
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME
BRITISH SCULPTURES, BY ARTIST'S NAME 