@@NEW:151
151. Profile head and shoulders of a laurel-crowned hero 
28.7cms. (height); 20.5 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
White marble of uncertain type, now dark grey with dirt and scratched. The relief is partially abraded most noticeably in the areas of highest relief, possibly from exposure to the elements. The losses to top right and lower left are consistent with the injudicious prising of the relief from a wall into which it had been cemented. The edges may not however be original: that to proper right would not, if continued, contain the projecting portion of relief below it. 
Transferred from the Department of Antiquities in 1986. The relief was moved to the basement of the University Galleries early in 1888 from the basement of the Old Ashmolean Museum. It had probably been kept during the eighteenth century in the Bodleian Library. In 1763 when published in Chandler's Marmora Oxoniensia, L pl. XLIV, no. XCII, the relief was unbroken and framed with pilaster strips decorated with ribbon ornament and a substantial plinth and entablature. Bequeathed to the University by Dr Richard Rawlinson, Gentleman Commoner of st John's College (MA 1713, Hon. DCL 1719), a keen antiquary and avid collector in many fields, who died in 1755. Rawlinson had been a severe critic of the management of the Ashmolean Museum and established in his will a fund to pay for a proper keeper of it (who was to be neither a Scotsman nor in holy orders). he also bequeathed a few trifles to it (including a model gondola and a Muscovian fox). Rawlinson 'had formed his collection [of classical marbles], in which there was certainly a good deal of rubbish, principally at the Kemp sale and the Oxford sale' (A. Michaelis, Ancient Marbles in Great Britain (Cambridge, 1882), 539; Chandler, op. cit., pp. V-VI). The sale of John Kemp FRS was in March 1720 / 1 (the catalogue, by R. Ainsworth was entitled Monumenta vetustatis Kempiana (London,1920)) and that of the earl of Oxford was in March 1741 / 2. 
Michaelis in his late nineteenth-century catalogue of the antique marbles in Oxford (op. cit. 591, no. 222 observed merely that this relief is 'new', by which he meant not ancient, as had been assumed by Chandler in the eighteenth century (op. cit. i, pl. XLIV, no. XCII). It is likely to be Italian and possibly sixteenth or seventeenth century, but more probably early eighteenth century, in date. The style of hair and youthful, blandly idealized profile suggests the numerous portraits of Augustus. There are similar low relief crowned heads in profile in the second plane of the ancient Roman relief sculpture representing processions and triumphs: the head immediately in front of the emperor's chariot in one of the reliefs in the interior of the Arch of Titus (e AD 90) and several heads in the relief of the Vicomagistri (AD 41-50) in the Museo Gregoriano Profano are convenient examples. 


@@NEW:152
152. Farnese Hercules 
56.4 cms. (height including plinth, but excluding the rough projection beneath it); 3 cms. (height of plinth at back); 22.8 cms. (length of plinth); 20.6 cms. (width of plinth); 4.8 cms (height of rough projection below the plinth) 
@@PROCESS
Terracotta of a Pale biscuit Colour. Solid. The hero's head, arms, left leg (at knee), and right leg (at lower thigh), also the drapery behind the club and the base beside the feet, have been broken off and replaced with a plaster cement which is very evident. Chips are missing along the joins. the hands have been broken off. This right arm now terminates in a stump and his left has a crudely modelled substitute hand. '9427 / 1936 / eGg' is painted in black on the underside of the plinth at the back. 
Transferred from the Department of Antiquities, after the refixing of some of the repairs, in August 1987. The terracotta was one of numerous objects (chiefly flints, amulets, and gem impressions) which were transferred from the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine to the Department of Antiquities on 29 June 1982 (after an agreement reached in November 1981). Eric J. Freeman, Librarian of the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, wrote on 3 December 1987, in reply to enquiries concerning the provenance, that the terracotta must have come from the Gorga Collection (hence 'eGg'). Wellcome purchased the collection of medical and other antiquities formed by Signor Even Gorga of 285 Via Cola di Rienzo, Rome, in 1924 (having first made overtures to do so in February 1912). The figure is likely to be the 'Terra cotta statuette (Hercules) W. 67' in the list of 'cases and contents' made in Rome in 1924. There were, however, over 300 terracotta items in the collection and at least one other terracotta Hercules. 
The terracotta is a copy of the famous antique statue in the Farnese Collection of Hercules resting after his labours. It could have been made in the seventeenth, eighteenth, or nineteenth century. There is another, slightly smaller, terracotta copy of the Hercules signed by Maderno in the Ashmolean (No. 56), also a large and small bronze copy (Nos. 414, 416). This is less sharply modelled and less detailed than the Maderno and in some respects is closer to the original, although of little artistic merit. 

@@NEW:153&154
153 and 154. Hercules slaying the Erymanthian Boar and Hercules slaying Geryon 
26cms. (height of No.153); 27cms. (height of No.154) 
Terracotta. There are breaks across the base by the hero's left foot in No.154, also in his raised right arm across biceps and waist. These have been mended, but are conspicuous. There are traces of gilding on the lion skin and the boar in No.153 and also on parts of No.154. Both groups are unfinished from behind and appear to have been scraped down. No.153 has on the underside of Its base the following in blue pencil 'No 1818' and on a circular label in biro '8976'. No.154 has in the same place some indecipherable marks in blue pencil and on a circular label in biro '8977'. 
Bought from the Arcade Gallery (Paul Wengraf), The Royal Arcade, 28 Old Bond Street, London W1. Registered 12 December 1960. 
The bozzetti were registered as possibly by Vincenzo de Rossi and described soon afterwards, in the Annual Report (1960: 63) as follows: 
Their tense muscular action and vigorous contrapposto recall the style of Bandinelli's pupil, Vincenzo de' Rossi (1525-I 587), who was commissioned by Cosimo de' Medici to execute the Twelve Labours of Hercules in marble and larger than life. Work on the series was in progress in the Opera del Duomo by 1563 and two of the finished groups were praised by Vasari in the 1568 edition of his Lives. Six of the seven marbles completed, including versions of Geryon and the Boar, still stand, as they were arranged in 1592, along opposite walls of the Salone del Cinquecento in the Palazzo Vecchio. 
For this series of sculptures see H. Utz, 'The Labours of Hercules and Other Works by Vincenzo de' Rossi', Art Bulletin (Sept.1971), 344-6, where, however, these bozzetti are not mentioned, Professor Utz having expressed his opinion, on seeing photographs of the groups, that they had 'nothing in common' with sculpture by de' Rossi. He thought that they might be connected with a minor sculptor in the circle of Romulo del Tadda who was responsible for the groups carved in pietra sirena which were placed around the bolotto of the Boboli Gardens (letter of 13 April 1971 in the Department's Archive). Professor Ulrich Middeldorf had also questioned the connection with de' Rossi as early as 23 June 1961, writing to Ian Robertson: 'The Labours of Hercules have nothing to do with Bandinelli or Vincenzo de Rossi ... They are as to period certainly closer to Maderno; but his groups have different proportions, movements and detail' (letter in the Department's Archive). 
There is surely no reason why the groups should not date from the seventeenth or eighteenth century, nor is there any reason for them to be Florentine, for, although the Labours were especially popular subjects there in the fifteenth and sixteenth century, they were popular all over Italy as well: there are seventeenth- and eighteenth-century examples in or from the Veneto which are similar in character and conceived for niches (or at least to be placed against a wall or hedge)- a pair of crude Istrian Stone groups of Hercules clubbing cerberus and tearing the jaws of the Nemean Lion now flank the entrance of Palazzo Pisani in Venice; others may be seen in the grounds of villas in the Veneto; an impressive Hercules and the Hydra signed by Giovanni Marchiori and probably of about 1760 is in a Private collection (F. Russell, 'A Statue of Hercules and the Hydra by Giovanni Marchiori', Burlington Magazine (June 1972), 393 and fig. 58). 
A sample from both terracotta groups was examined by thermo-luminescence at the Oxford Research Laboratory for Art and Archaeology in October 1986 and estimated as fired between 240 and 370 years ago (ref. 38L-y-36).

@@NEW:155
155. Bust of a black boy wearing a tasselled cap and frogged doublet 
28.4cms. (height); 20.6cms. (length, across sleeves); 12.3 cms. (height of socle); 13.2 cms. (diameter of base of socle) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a natural chestnut coloured patina exposed, especially in the face, beneath coloured varnishes. The flesh is varnished black; the cap a dark black-green; the kerchief, shirt, part of the eyes, and one tooth white; the kerchief ribbon and lips red. The varnishes have chipped off or worn through in parts and have darkened in colour. The doublet was covered with a gold varnish as were parts of the cap: this is best preserved at the back of the ball attached to the cap's tassel and in the ribbon attaching the feathers. Hollow, heavy-walled, lost-wax, cast. Some flaws in the lower part of the chest. The bust is open at the back of the chest and the head has been filled with plaster. An old iron file embedded in the latter extends to a waisted spreading socle of verde di prato (Tuscan Serpentine). 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888 and given later in the same year. 8. 402 in his catalogues. According to the notebook catalogue it was bought in 1860 for £6 (the date but not the price is given in the large catalogue). The bronze has long been in reserve. 
Fortnum described this remarkable bronze as 'n. Italian, probably Venetian'. Blacks of course played a large part in Venetian art. He dated it to the sixteenth century, although a later date seems more likely. Aileen Ribeiro considers it likely that it dates from the early eighteenth century and notes that a livery combining 'hussar' and 'Vandyck' elements was popular for servants then. The varnishes look old but may not be original. That on the cap conceals the very carefully punched foliate pattern and the textured contrast of the lining which is turned over at the back. The socle, recorded in Fortnum's catalogues, cannot be original. 

@@NEW:156
156. Virgin and Child with a crescent moon 
56 cms. (height); 64 cms. (length; 30.9 cms. (height of oval relief within oval frame); 26 cms. (width of relief within oval frame); 18.2 cms. (height of Virgin from top of head to the sleeve below the wrist) 
The relief of the Virgin and Child is certainly of terracotta. The framework has been described as of stone but seems also to be of terracotta. The rear of the relief is made up with lath and plaster and some bricks. The Virgin is clothed in red with a blue cloak. The ground against which the swags are set is a green blue and there are traces of green on the ground around the oval. But most colouring has darkened and flaked. Much seems also to have been distressed. Bought from the Arcade Gallery (Paul Wengraf), The Royal Arcade, 28 Old Bond Street, London W1, in 1964. Registered immediately after the terracotta relief attributed to Mazza (@@LINK:No. 78@@) without a date but between 10 and 16 June. The relief is shown in photographs dated 1966 high on the wall of the Fox Strangways Gallery. It has long been in reserve. 
The relief was associated by Ian Robertson with Giuseppe Mazza because of its supposed similarity to the terracotta relief of the Virgin and Child which he bought at about the same time (No. 78), although he conceded that it was 'less masterly in modelling' (Annual Report (1964), 51). The relief certainly looks Italian and of the seventeenth or eighteenth century. The architectural framework, colouring, and material would suggest that this originated as a popular street shrine. The removal of such, however, was not easily achieved even in the upheavals at the end of the Second World War. Work of this character and of such moderate quality is easily imitated.

@@NEW:157
157. A young martyr stoned and beaten 
31.5 cms. (height); 43.3 cms. (length); 41.5 cms (outside height of frame); 53.5 cms. (outside width of frame) 
@@PROCESS
Terracotta of a pale orange colour coated with a yellowish grey slip which has been rubbed to a warm brown on some salient parts (such as the buttocks of the flagellator and the foreheads of the most prominent elders). Mounted against a ruddy brown velvet framed with a gilt wood reverse moulding. 
Bought at the Arcade Gallery (Paul Wengraf), The Royal Arcade, 28 Old Bond Street, London W1, for £850 in July 1962 (receipt dated 14 July, registered without a date but between 21 July and 6 August) with the aid of a grant from the Regional Fund administered by the Victoria and Albert Museum. Bought by Wengraf at Sotheby's, London,10 May 1962, as lot 92. Framed by the Museum in 1962 (Annual Report, p. 27). 
The subject was identified at auction, by the dealer selling it, and by the Keeper (lan Robertson) buying it, as the Flagellation of Christ, but, as Alastair Laing has pointed out, two of the bearded elders appear to be preparing to stone the victim, only one figure is about to beat him, there is a crowned figure seated behind and presiding over the scene, accompanied by a large chorus of elders (also assembled to proper left) all of which is unorthodox in a Flagellation. Moreover, if Christ is represented by the figure tied to the column, he is unusually small in size. It may be that the episode represented is a relatively obscure one in the life of a martyr. Robertson, publishing the relief in the Annual Report (1962: 63), wrote that there was 'no evidence to uphold the tentative attribution made there either to Antonio Calcagni or to Tiberio Verzelli'. He was sure, however, that it was Venetian and mid-sixteenth century in date and added that it was 'Masterly both in composition and execution' and 'clearly a modello or trial piece for a panel in relief in a bronze door'. There seems no good reason to assign it to the sixteenth century and the concave-sided frame with cherubim in the chamfered corners is more typical of the seventeenth or early eighteenth century. It does not look certainly Venetian in style. And it could be a modello a for a panel in marble or stucco on a plinth below a statue, or perhaps for a silver relief on an altar. It is not 'clearly' for a door. Nor is it 'masterly'. It looks like a pastiche and its antiquity has been put in doubt by the thermo-luminescence test carried out on a sample taken by Mrs Doreen Stoneham of the Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art in April 1974 which suggested that it was fired less than 115 years previously (ref. 81-m-65). 
It has recently been observed by Peter Cannon-Brookes that this is clearly related t:o one of the marble reliefs of the life of St Trifone in the Cathedral of Boka Kotorska (Bocche di Cattaro) on the Dalmatian coast. A similar modello for another of these reliefs is in the Aartsbisschoppelijk Museum, Utrecht. The marble reliefs  by Francesco Ca' Bianca (1665~1737) and can be dated 1700-1704. They are very much more timid in style than the terracottas which might be by another hand. How this is reconciled with the suspicions voiced above is not clear. 

@@NEW:158
158. Charity in a landscape 
32.7 cms. (height); 40.75 cms. (length); 7 cms. (maximum depth of relief) 
@@PROCESS
Terracotta, painted naturalistically. The colours have deteriorated and the flesh is now a green grey and the foliage is brown. The clay has been slightly hollowed behind the woman. At the base it has been thickened and forms a flat surface, the other edges are irregular. The paint has flaked off the woman's light shoulder and arm, the face of the infant to her right, and the body of the older child to her left. '4905' is written on the reverse of the relief in the upper corner to proper right. 
Bought from the Arcade Gallery (Paul Wengraf), The Royal Arcade, 28 Old Bond Street, London Wl, in September 1960 for £350 (the invoice is dated 20 September, the receipt 22 September, but the work was registered on 8 August). 
Charity is traditionally represented as nursing three eager children and not uncommonly expressing milk, as seems to be the case here, into the mouth of the oldest and most active of them. The nest full of young birds, which is somewhat roughly indicated in the crook of the tree to proper right, is obviously an appropriate attribute. It is hard to imagine how a work like this could have been originally displayed (a frame would be impossible). It would seem likely that it was a sketch for a larger relief and that the colouring was not intended. Parker publishing it in the Annual Report observed that it was 'suggestive in style of the Genoese school of the early Eighteenth Century', adding that 'the name of Francesco Maria Schiaffino (1691-1765) has been tentatively put forward as the author, but, for the present, comparative material to support this attribution is not forthcoming'. It was, it seems, the dealer who first suggested Schiaffino. A note in the Register records a letter from Hugh Honour to the Keeper of 11 May 1961 proposing other Genoese sculptors of the early eighteenth century, Domenico Parodi or Anton Maria Maragliano. There seems no compelling reason to associate the relief with the Genoese School, nor can it be regarded as certainly Italian. 


@@NEW:159 
159. Set of profile medallion portrait heads of the Twelve Caesars 
5.5 cms. (height of each ivory medallion); 4.3 cms. (width of each ivory medallion); 5 cms. (height of.each medallion visible within its frame); 4 cms. (width of each medallion visible within its frame) 
@@PROCESS
Ivory, mounted in frames of bronze, fire-gilt (ormolu), which are pinned to a stand of ebonized wood. The eight portraits on the front of the stand are linked by the swags of husks, also of bronze, fire-gilt. Many portions of the ormolu mounts have been removed, some of them in recent years. The bronze ribbons above Titus have a firing crack in the suspension loop and the end of the ribbon to proper right is missing. The entire swag of husks connecting the medallion of Augustus with that of Tiberius and the ring mid-way between them from which the medallion of Claudius is hung are missing. The ivory medallions  chiselled with the names of the emperors represented: 'DOMIT (for Domitian); 'TITUS'; 'G IUL' (for Gaius Julius Caesar); 'NERO'; 'G CAES' (for Gaius Caligula); 'AUG' (for Augustus); 'GALBA'; 'TI CLAUD)' (for Claudius); 'TI CAES' (for Tiberius); 'M OTHO' (for Otho); 'A VITEL' (for Vitellius); 'VESPAS' (for Vespasian). 
The ivories are attached to the stand which forms part of the Fitzwilliam Coin Cabinet bought at auction in 1949 for the Heberden Coin Room (see @@LINK:Nos. 35@@ and @@LINK:63@@).  
The mounts consist of shot against a flat band (the band given a punched texture), husk swags (similarly textured), and suspension ribbons with fluttering ends (a punched texture on one side contrasted with a burnished reverse). The design is typical of the 1770s and could hardly be earlier than the mid-1760s. It is reminiscent of the patterns employed, especially for stucco interior decoration, by Sir William Chambers, James Stuart, and John Carr of York--the last two named architects, being employed by the marquess of Rockingham to make improvements at Wentworth Woodhouse, could indeed have designed the stand to which these mounts  applied. The stand, with its tapering square legs and avoidance of curves, is of sophisticated design, although not of superior workmanship or materials. It serves to support and supplement the pietra dura cabinet which was converted to serve as a coin cabinet as discussed under @@LINK:No. 35@@. The heads of the Caesars are an obvious enough ornament for a coin cabinet: a late eighteenth-century example with exceptionally large bronze plaquettes of the Caesars was with an antique dealer in Chipping Norton early in 1989. But it is surprising that a keen numismatist such as the marquess of Rockingham, for whom the cabinet was presumably made, should have tolerated such chronological disorder in the arrangement of these medallions on the outside of a piece of furniture designed to keep medals and coins in proper sequence. The only evidence of thought in the arrangement is the priority given to Augustus in the centre of the top row below the keyhole. The explanation for this disorder may be in an unrecorded restoration of the cabinet, perhaps during the last century. Lord Rockingham seems to have owned some other furniture of a superior character, similarly decorated, for in the sale at Christie's, London, of 'Etruscan and Greek Vases and Fine English Furniture' from Wentworth Woodhouse on 15 July 1948, lot 135 was a 'Pair of Adam mahogany show cabinets the cornices with upsprung foliage and with festoons suspended from ivory medallions carved in relief from busts of Roman Emperors and others'. 
It may be that the ivories on the coin cabinets were carved at the same date as the mounts, but it is much more likely that they were purchased at an earlier date and had not previously served as mounts. In any case they had to be supplemented by two ivories of a different character (@@LINK:Nos. 160@@ and @@LINK:161@@) and the arrangement looks improvised. Rockingham had travelled all over Europe and bought from other collectors who had done so, so there is no reason to suppose that the ivories are of British origin. 
Medallion portraits of the Caesars of the type which are imitated from Roman coinage (the source often being sixteenth-century engravings of such coin portraits by Marcantonio Raimondi, Hubert Goltzius, or Théodore de Bry) are common in a variety of size and media. Some metal plaquettes of the Caesars, many with identical portraits to those in the set catalogued here, seem to be Italian and of the mid-sixteenth century: a set of bronzes is in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna (IN. 7689-99, for which see Natur und Antike in der Renaissance (Liebieghaus, Frankfurt on Main, 1985-6), 345-9, nos. 36-46) and one of lead in the municipal collections of Ferrara (see R. Varese, Placchette e bronzi nelle Civiche Collezioni (Ferrara and Pomposa, 1974-5), 43-6). During the early seventeenth century such portraits were very popular in Limoges enamel (there are some examples in the Ashmolean Museum, but for the complete range see Musée de la Renaissance, Chateau d'Écouen, CL. 22625-8; CL.10965-8; CL. 22629-34). Probably dating from the end of the seventeenth century are some ivory examples in which the head is cut out rather than part of an oval ivory medallion--'cut out' furniture mounts being popular in this period (see @@LINK:No. 256@@). The most splendid set of this type is that in the Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, Munich, in which the heads are placed against a tortoiseshell ground (they are arranged in two frames--R. 1050 and R.1051--and labelled as German of e1700). Another set of good quality is in the Staatliche Museen, Berlin-Dahlem, and is catalogued as 'north German?' by C. Theuerkauff (Die Bildwerke in Elfenbein des 16.-19. Jahrhunderts (Berlin, 1986), 307-13 nos. 96-107). A very similar set, but of lower quality, mounted on a single tray, was with the Mount Street Galleries, 125 Mount Street, London, in June 1986. In this case there were ivory labels with the names of the emperors spelled in a way that suggests an Italian origin. 
Ivory medallions of the type catalogued here are generally regarded as dating from the mid-eighteenth century or later. A set differing only in trifling details (such as the movement of the ribbon behind the neck of Vespasian), mounted in two ebonized frames, was lot 118 on 30 June 1987 at Phillips, London. Another set in a private collection, also very similar, is mounted as a book, in exactly the manner employed for gesso impressions of the same subjects, with an Italian text. A distinctive feature of all these medallions is that the emperors are now all represented with their profiles facing to the right whereas in the earlier cut-out ivories, as in the bronze and lead plaquettes, half the profiles face the other way. 


@@NEW:160&161
160 and 161. Profile medallion portrait busts of Hadrian and ‘Sabina’ 
7.7 cms. (height of each medallion visible within its frame); 5.9 cms. (width of each medallion visible within its frame); 9 cms. (height of each beaded frame); 14.7cms. (height of each mount including suspension of ribbon); 6 cms. (width of each beaded frame)
@@PROCESS
Ivory, mounted in frames of ivory, fire-gilt (ormolu) pinned to an ebonized stand. There are slight vertical splits on the head and neck of Hadrian. The surface of those of Sabina is abraded and slightly discoloured. The mounts are cast from an identical mould. The end of the ribbon to proper left of the mount of the portrait of Sabina has been broken off and is missing. 
The ivories are attached to the stand which forms part of the Fitzwilliam Coin Cabinet bought at auction in 1949 for the Heberden Coin Room (see @@LINK:Nos. 35@@, @@LINK:63@@,@@LINK:159@@). 
The ivories are clearly by a different artist from the other ivory medallions of the Caesars on the same cabinet (@@LINK:No.159@@). These are larger, more elegant, doubtless based on idcalized bust sculpture rather than on the conventions of numismatic portraiture. That their prototypes are exactly adhered to is suggested by the disparity in the cutting of the chest. This night also suggest that they in fact came from different sets, but the style of carving is very similar. Their incorporation into the coin cabinet strongly suggests that the ornamentation of the cabinet was improvised out of a miscellany of existing ivories in Lord Rockingham's collection. Had he ordered a set of ivories for this purpose he would have included other emperors and other profiles facing left, would have had all the medallions of a standard size, and would not have included only one emperor from a later dynasty. Moreover the tightness of the frame around the chest of Hadrian and around the head and chest of Sabina suggests that the medallions have been adapted for these mounts. The portrait of Hadrian''s consort, Sabina, does not correspond with any recorded in such standard sources of the period as the Iconographie romaine by A. Mongez, (Paris,1826), and it may have been mistaken for Sabina or intended to pass for her. The other bust is certainly a portrait of Hadrian. 


@@NEW:162 
162. Standing bull 
33.4 cms. (height); 40.6 cms. (length); 2.6 cms. (height of marble slab); 40.6 cms. (length of marble slab); 17.9 cms. (width of marble slab); 5 cms. (height of wooden plinth); 47 cms. (length of wooden plinth); 24 cms. (width of wooden plinth)
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a dark brown to golden brown patina. Hollow, presumably lost-wax, cast. The tail has been cast separately and riveted. The metal has been scratched to suggest hair. The bronze is mounted on a slab of Siena yellow marble with an ebonized wooden plinth. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. 8. 443 in his catalogues. 'Bought of Maggi of Genoa with others 1848 £30' according to the preliminary and the notebook catalogues--the other bronzes which he obtained from this source in 1848 are the Jupiter (@@LINK:No. 337@@), the Centaur with Cupid (@@LINK:No. 164@@), and the famous Listening Pan formerly attributed to Riccio. Long in reserve, the bronze was placed on display in the Fortnum Gallery in 1985. 
The bronze Bull is not dissimilar in character to a smaller one with its right foot raised which was cast in large numbers by the workshop of Giambologna, and this explains the relatively early date often given to it. The version in the Liebieghaus, Frankfurt (@@LINK:no. 1339@@), is described on an old label as 'Italian, sixteenth-century', which was the opinion published by H. Weihrauch, Europäische Bronzestatuetten (Brunswick, 1967), 379. The version in the Wallace Collection (in the Hertford House Collection by 1834) was catalogued by J. G. Mann as Italian and of the seventeenth or eighteenth century (Wallace Collection Catalogues: Sculpture (1931), with supplement of 1981, S143, p. 52). Fortnum seems at first to have regarded his version as by 'an able caster probably French and of the period of Louis XIV' but he amended his entry in his notebook catalogue inserting 'Italian' after the 'probably' and a 'perhaps' before the 'French' and changing the 'XIV' to 'XV or XVI'. 
The prototype, as Fortnum knew, was the much restored antique Bull carved out of a fine-grained speckled grey marble in the Sala degli Animali of the Museo Pio-Clementino in the Vatican. This is now known to have been excavated between 1775 and 1780 at Ostia and so the bronze versions cannot date from before then (W. Amelung, Die Skulpturen des Vaticanishen Museums (Berlin,1908), ii. 340, no.131, pl. 33., C. Pietrangli, Scavi e scoperte di antichità sotto il pontificato di Pio VI (Rome,1958), 113). The earliest reference to it in literature seems to be Massi's Indicazione antiquaria of 1792 (41, no.14) and it is unlikely to have been reproduced before then. The bronzes are more or less exactly the same size as the marble and differ only in that they dispense with the tree trunk support under the animal's belly. It is worth noting that the Vatican Bull may be the one listed by Zoffoli (see Nos. 110-11) in his printed Serie di figure available in bronze from his Roman showroom in the 1790s, as the Toretto, the little bull, next on the list to, and perhaps intended as a companion for, an écorché Tiger (Notomia di tigre). But he offered his bronzes of this subject for sale at 10 zecchini and they must at this price have been smaller than the Ashmolean's version. Toretto could also describe a bull of the Giambologna type. Too much significance should not be attached to the provenance of Fortnum's piece, but the fact that this is after a relatively obscure sculpture in the Vatican does make Rome the most probable place of origin. It was copied in Portuguese earthenware later in the nineteenth century at the Mafra factory at Caldas da Rainha (see J. Poole, Plagiarism Personified (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, 1986), 32, no. D12). 
For the bronze Lion commissioned by Fortnum as a companion to this Bull see @@LINK:No. 87@@. 



@@NEW:163
163. Medallion profile head of a hero or ruler 
37.5 cms. (height including base); 33.4 cms. (diameter of marble relief)
@@PROCESS
Carrara marble, discoloured by dirt. Chipped at the rim at lower proper right The relief is circular and has been set in a Portland stone base. 
Transferred from the Department of Antiquities in 1986. Bequeathed by Dr Richard Rawlinson. For the provenance see No. 151. The stone support seems not to have been in place in 1763 when the relief was published in R. Chandler, Marmora Oxoniensia (Oxford,1763), i, pl. XLV. no. CVIII. 
Adolf Michaelis in his late nineteenth-century catalogue of the antique sculpture in Oxford (Ancient Marbles in Great Britain (Cambridge,1882), 591, no. 223) observed merely that this relief is 'new', by which he meant not ancient as had been assumed by Chandler in the eighteenth century (op. cit.). It is likely to be Italian and probably dates from the early eighteenth century. It may be imitated from the head of a ruler on a Hellenistic coin. 

@@NEW:164
164. Centaur ridden by Cupid 
40.5 cms. (height of centaur); 17.6 cms. (height of cupid); 3.6 cms. (height of green marble plinth); 27.2 cms. (length of this plinth); 16 cms. (width of.this plinth 9.4 cms. (height of marble sub-plinth); 30.8 cms. (length of this plinth); 19.9 cms. (width of same) 
@@PROCESS
The centaur is of bronze with a dark brown to black varnish worn in parts to expose a chestnut patina. Hollow, presumably lost-wax, cast. The Cupid is of silver, also hollow cast, with separate, solid cast, wings soldered to his body. The silver has tarnished to a dull pale brown and grey. The wrists of the centaur  attached to the Cupid with a miniature silver chain. The centaur seems to have been cast in two parts: an irregular join is visible just below the waist. The supporting rock below one foot has been separately cast. The centaur is mounted on a plinth of very dark green marble (said by For[num to be 'the richest quality verd-antique') to the short faces of which an ormolu swag of flowers is attached and to the long faces strips of ormolu, that at the front with raised letters against a textured field reading: 'COME'L CENTAURO, AMOR, DEH ANNODA IL TEMPO!' and that on the back engraved with cursive letters 'Gioanni da Bologna. Fece il Centauro. Gioanni Dughè fece l'amore'. This plinth rests on a sub-plinth consisting of a slab of streaky dove grey marble (probably from Carrara) supporting a slab of white Carrara marble each side of which is decorated in very low relief 'with a guilloche of leafy sprays which intertwine between inlaid coloured agates etc.' (Fortnum)--each of these stones is oval; among them are pieces of antique imperial porphyry, cornelians, and antique onyx. There  small chips and scratches, especially to the edges of the plinth. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. B. 440 in his catalogues. Bought by Fortnum from Maggi of Genoa in 1848 for £25 according to the notebook and the preliminary catalogues (no date, provenance, or price is given in the large manuscript catalogue). On display in the Coin Room lobby since 1956. 
The group was catalogued by Fortnum as 'after one of the Centaurs of the Capitoline Museum found in Hadrian's Villa at Tivoli'. These black marble Centaurs (missing their riders) were excavated in 1736 and placed in the Museum by 1765 (see F. Haskell and N. Penny, Taste and the Antique (London and New Haven, Conn., 1981), 178-9). It is, however, possible that the antique prototype for the Ashmolean group was the white marble Centaur which was by the early seventeenth century in the Borghese Collection but has, since the early nineteenth century, been in the Louvre (ibid. 179), although the silver Cupid is different in attitude from the much-restored figure on the back of that version. In details this small centaur docs not correspond exactly with either the Borghese or the Capitoline examples: the sexual organ has been omitted as have the veins on the belly. More generally there is much less sinew and muscle in the body and much less pathos in the face. Bronze reproductions of the Capitoline versions signed by Righetti in the late eighteenth century and the bronze reproduction of the Borghese version in the collection of Sir Brinsley Ford are not only more exact but far more lively than this. 
The attribution of the centaur to Giambologna ('Gioanni Bologna') need not be taken seriously, although Fortnum presumably did date the work to the late sixteenth century for this reason. The attribution of the Cupid to 'Gioanni Dughè', presumably Jean Dughet, Poussin's brother-in-law, is far more peculiar and merits explanation if not respect. It prompted Bell to give the group a seventeenth-century date. The insipid modelling and neat but prissy finish of the centaur would surely be less surprising in the eighteenth century than in the seventeenth-it would be still less unusual in the early nineteenth century. The Cupid is quite different in style as the double attribution acknowledges. It is typical of the blandly smiling and flabbily gracious version of the baroque style much beloved by Italian goldsmiths from the late seventeenth century onwards and still evident in ecclesiastical altar fittings of a traditional kind made today. The pose of the Cupid is not well suited to the mount and he relates uncomfortably to the centaur's tail. 
The sub-plinth looks as if it cannot be much earlier in date than 1848 when Fortnum acquired the group and the green marble plinth, if older, may not be much earlier in date. The manner in which the centaur is bolted to the plinth at three points does not look as if it is original. A rock has been added to the centaur's back left hoof and the back right hoof has an extension enabling it to make proper contact with the plinth. There is a crack in the marble. where the latter has been bolted. Bell in his marginal annotation to Fortnum's large catalogue observes that 'the Motto on the plinth may perhaps indicate that with its present setting the group was at one time intended to decorate a clock'. 


@@NEW:165
165. Terminal head of a maenad 17.5 cms. (height including plinth); 2 cms. (height of plinth) 
Giallo antico (yellow marble from Roman Numidian quarries). There is an old crack across the neck and the hair falling down beside it to proper right. There are losses along the front edge of the chest and on the nose which have been made lip with plaster tinted to match the marble (but in the case of the nose now scratched in parts to reveal the white of the plaster). The leaves and berries below the ear to proper left have been broken and repaired. There are chips missing from many of the leaves. Mounted on a plinth consisting of a block of pale Siena marble with a paper label pasted to the front face with 'OLDFIELD COLL.' typed on it and '62' written in ink. 
Transferred in August 1986 from the Department of Antiquities. Bequeathed by Edmund Oldfield FSA in 1902, No. 3 in the section 'Marble' of the list given in a letter from Oldfield's solicitors on 16 May-where described as 'a small mask of youthful faun'. No. 62 in the 'Catalogue of works presented and bequeathed by Edmund Oldfield' which is compiled out of Oldfield’s own manuscripts, where described as 'terminal bust of a Maenad'. Additional notes, apparently by Arthur Evans, record that Oldfield bought the head at the Purnell Sale at Sotheby's in April 1872. For Oldfield see also No. 56. 
Miniature antique Roman heads of this sort do survive and there seems to have been no suspicion when this item was received in the Department of Antiquities that it was not ancient. However, the suspicions when they did arise were justified. There was a vogue for such works, often carved out of scraps of antique marble and copying famous heads in the great Roman museums, in the late eighteenth century. Charles Heathcote Tatham acting as agent in Rome for the architect Henry Holland included drawings of ten such among numerous miniature obelisks, urns, and baths in coloured marble on a sheet captioned 'Various modern ornaments for Chimney Pieces &c. (chiefly worked in antique marbles of the rarest kind, & others found in excavations made at Rome) collected there for Henry Holland Esq. Architect in the years 1795 & 1796' (Album of sketches, private collection). One of these heads is very similar to this term except that it is cut at the neck and mounted on a columnar pedestal. For other heads of this sort see Nos. 166-8. 

@@NEW:166
166. Terminal head of Jupiter 12.5 cms. (height)
@@PROCESS
Giallo antico (yellow marble from Roman Numidian quarries). The marble has a pink band and white vein. A small chip is missing from the front edges of the chest. '[EF ligature] / S.33' is painted in black on the rear of the term and below this '3182' is written in pencil. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. S. 33 in his catalogues. Employed by him as a chimney-piece ornament at the Hill House, Stanmore, together with three similar pieces (see Nos. 167, 168, and 169). 'Bought for £3-10s at the Sale of the Debruge Coll.' [that is the Debruge-Duménil Collection of objets d’art--for which see No. 292] in Paris, 23~31 January, 1-11 February and 12 March 1850, lot 134 (449, no. 134, in Jules Labarte's catalogue of 1847)--'marbre jaune antique tête de Jupiter d'après l'antique 13 centimetres'. In his preliminary catalogue (p. 7) Fortnum noted that this head had a pedestal of rosso antico. 
For heads of this sort see No.165. Fortnum catalogued this correctly as 'a reduced copy, probably from the antique. Italian l8th or early 19th century'. The work copied is the head of the Verospi Jove in the Museo Pio-Clementino of the Vatican. 

@@NEW:167
167. Terminal head of silenus 
12.55 cms. (height including brass base) 
@@PROCESS
White, presumably Carrara, marble, now brown with ingrained dust. It has been broken across the beard and the lower part of the head: the adhesive employed to fix it has darkened and the line of the join although fine is therefore visible. The bust is mounted in a tray base of brass with a machined torus moulding. '[EF ligature] / S.3' is painted in black on the rear of the term. There  a small oval paper label and a small lozenge-shaped paper label with a blue border both marked '52' on the underside of the base. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in January 1888 and given later in the sane year. S. 3 in his catalogues. Employed by him as a chimney piece ornament at the Hill House, Stanmore, together with three similar pieces (see Nos. 166,168, and 169). Bought at the sale of the Debruge-Duménil Collection of objets d’art (for which see No. 292) in Paris, 23-31 January, 1-11 February, and 12 March 1850, lot 136 (no.136 in Jules Labarte's catalogue of 1847)-'marbre blanc. Buste de Silène couronné de pampres 14 cents.' It cost Fortnum £3 10s. according to his notebook catalogue. 
For heads of this sort see No.165. This example is probably a companion piece for No.168. The brass base has been lost from the latter and the use of the drill is more conspicuous in it. Fortnum believed it to be an ancient Roman piece broken from a sarcophagus relief and 'worked up' as a bust.

@@NEW:168
168. Terminal head of Jupiter Ammon 
11.5 cms. (height) 
@@PROCESS
White, presumably Carrara, marble, now brown with ingrained dust. It has been broken at the top of the neck and refixed. The proper left horn has been broken and most of it is lost. There are extensive traces of darkened adhesive on the stump of the horn. '[EF ligature] / S.4' is painted in black on the rear of the term. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in January 1888 and given later in the same year. S. 4 in his catalogues. Employed by him as a chimney piece ornament at the Hill House, Stanmore, together with three similar pieces (see Nos. 166,167, and 169). Bought from the sale of the Debruge-Duménil Collection of objets d’art (for which see No. 292) in Parts, 23-31 January, 1-11 February, and 12 March 1850, lot 135 (no.135 in Jules Labarte’s catalogue raisonné of 1847)--'marbre blanc, Buste de Satyr. 12 centimetres'. It cost Fortnum £3 10s. according to his notebook catalogue. 
For heads of this sort see No.165. This example is probably a companion piece for No. 167. Fortnum believed it to be of Pan and thought it was broken from the same relief. 

@@NEW:169
169. Mask of pan or Silenus 17 cms. (height)
@@PROCESS
Giallo antico (yellow marble from Roman Numidian quarries), considerably abraded, also bleached, probably from exposure to the elements. The eye sockets  hollow as if designed for eyes of different coloured stone or paste. A portion has been broken off by the proper left ear and from the end of the central ringlet of the beard. The back of the mask is flat with holes filled with plaster of Paris in which large nails have been set There is also a large patch of old glue on the flat back. 'S. / 2. / [EF ligature]' is painted in black there. Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in January 1888 and given later in the same year. 'S. 2' in his catalogues. Employed by him as a chimney piece ornament at the Hill House, Stanmore, together with three similar pieces (see Nos.166,167, and 168). 'from near Athens' according to both the large and the notebook catalogues. Acquired before 1857 when the preliminary catalogue, in which it is included (p. 1, no. 2), was compiled. 
Although catalogued and displayed together with heads which he knew to be modern miniature chimney-piece copies Fortnum regarded this as belonging to a different category--'Greek. from near Athens. A boldly chiselled work full of artistic power. Probably the head of a terminal ornament.' In the notebook catalogue he speculated that the eye cavities would have been filled with coloured stone and after 'Greek' added 'or Greco-Roman'. Given the material it would have to date from after the Roman conquest of Greece, but it certainly does look ancient at first sight. It has, however, been confidently abandoned by the Department of Antiquities. 

@@NEW:170
170. Four terminal busts of a bearded hero or deity attached to a bookcase 
17.4 cms. (height of each); 9.2 cms. (length of each); 9 cms. (width of each)
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a dark brown varnish worn in several parts to a dark o|ivc green natural patina. hollow, lost-wax, cast, precisely chiselled. The busts are attached to, and were certainly made for, a bookcase illustrated in the photographs of C. D. E. Fortnum's house at Stanmore, probably dated from the later 1870s, but Included in the album dated 1873. The bookcase was not included by him in any of his catalogues. It has long occupied the office of the Keeper of the Department of Antiquities, but whether it arrived in the Museum soon after Fortnum's death in 1899 or at a later date (for example through Arthur Evans) is not recorded. See below for more on the provenance. 
The busts crown the pilasters which frame the three openings in the lower, plinth, stage of a severe but magnificent mahogany bookcase. Between each pilaster are glazed doors (double in the centre) and above these is a frieze containing drawers embellished, above each bust, with four gilt bronze or copper monograms of M and L interlaced below a royal crown. The frieze supports a shelf of somewhat grey porto venere (gold vein) marble from Genoa, above which rises the tall, narrower, rectangular upper stage of the case which is decorated, in the strips between the glazed doors, with an applied beading of darkly patinated bronze. This latter feature together with the pattern of the glazing bars, is typical of Tuscan neo-classicism. The. numbers a, b, and c marked on ivory discs above the doors of the upper stage suggest that the case comes from a larger suite. Bookcases of a very similar character also with the same crowned monogram and similar bronze busts attached to the pilasters are to be found in the Palazzo Pitti: these are recorded as coming from Lucca at the very end of 1850, and Alvar Gonzalez-Palacios has pointed out (cataloguing a comparable piece in The Adjectives of history (Colnaghi, June-July 1983), 34) that the monogram is that of Maria Luisa di Borbone (1782-1823), daughter of King Charles IV of Spain, who ruled the duchy of Lucca from 1817 until her death. The Ashmolean's bookcase must belong to this period: the crown is explained by Maria Luisa continuing to style herself queen (she had been very briefly queen of the newly created state of Etruria). Gonzalez-Palacios notes that many talented cabinet makers, among them the Frenchman I. 8. Youf, were active in Lucca in the early nineteenth century. 
Queen Maria Luisa's furniture was retained in Lucca by her son Carlo Ludovico and his wife Maria Teresa of Savoy (daughter of victor Emmanuel I) until 1847, when they became rulers of Parma (which had been Luisa's husband's duchy but had been granted at the Congress of Vienna to Marie Louise of Austria during her lifetime). After 1847 the furnishings of their palace in Lucca were dispersed, some remaining in Lucca, others being taken to Parma, and some (such as the bookcases already mentioned) being removed to Florence as the property of the grand duke of Tuscany to whom the duchy of Lucca now belonged. This was the very period at which Fortnum was starting to collect works of art in Italy and it is likely that he acquired the bookcase around 1850 and probably in Florence or Genoa. Alternatively he might have acquired it in Florence in 1875 when he seems to have bought many other items of furniture (e.g. Nos. 206, 209, 214, 215) for the refurbishment of Stanmore, but by that date he seems to have catalogued scrupulously his every acquisition, whereas in 1850 he probably did not regard even furniture of this kind as worth recording as part of his collection. 
The bronze busts with their impassive expressions, the flattened front plane of the foreheads, the distinct curls of hair and beard, symmetrically disposed, must be modelled on a Roman marble copy of an archaic Greek bronze. The severity of style was more easily accepted in ornamental and architectural sculpture than in gallery statues in Napoleonic (and post-Napoleonic) Italy, as in Hadrianic Rome. 

@@NEW:171
171. Fortitude
@@PROCESS
107.2 cms. (height from the upper surface of the integral base which is sunk in the top of the wooden pedestal); 102 cms. (height of pedestal); 48.5 cms. (diameter of base of pedestal) 
Terracotta of a pale orange beige colour. Hollow and possibly cast. The upper part of the helmet is detachable and seems to have been fired separately. There is a break passing through the column and the figures thighs. A large chip is missing from the lower part of the column shaft. Traces of gilding remain on the sandals, the column plinth, the girdle, and the cresting of the helmet. White paint, or at least a thin undercoat of gesso, remains in many of the hollows its partial survival making the plaster repairs to the break already mentioned less conspicuous. The figure was mounted on a modern oak pedestal now employed for No. 78. 
Ian Robertson wrote to Paul Wengraf of the Arcade Gallery (The Royal Arcade, 28 Old Bond Street, London Wl) on 3 April 1963 that 'Although brought to the brink of bankruptcy by my so doing, I have decided to keep the terracotta figure, and accordingly enclose my cheque for fl50.' The money had been found in the France Bequest Fund. The sculpture was evidently already in the Museum by April: it was registered on 21 June. 
'The figure, originally polychromed and bearing traces of gilding, is emblematic of the city of Bologna', according to lan Robertson publishing it in the Annual Report (1963), 52-3. There seems, however, no reason to suppose that it is anything more than a personification of Fortitude with the not unusual attributes of helmet, column, and club of Hercules. Robertson also wrote that it 'can be surely assigned to an artist of the Bolognese school, possibly a member of the Gandolfi family of sculptors.' For the sculptural activity of the Gandolfi see No. 37. This figure is not similar to any others that may reasonably be attributed to them. The pose is taken from a type of cross-legged antique Muse Polyhymnia known in a number of surviving marble versions which Canova so effectively imitated in his Terpsichore (completed in 1811). The gravity of demeanour, the lack of all flutter in the drapery, and the stationary and compact monumentality suggest a date in the first half of the nineteenth century. The figure no ]doubt comes from a series of virtues, perhaps adorning the niches of a neo-classical palace, coloured white and gold to accord with the surrounding decor. It was not uncommon for terracotta to be used in this way and a number of figures supposed to be of stucco have turned out to be of terracotta Coated with gesso. A large terracotta statue of Ospitalità in a private collection in Rome attributed by Federico Zeri to Canillo Pacetti (1758-1826), published in Sculture del xv al xix secolo della collezione di Federico Zeri (Milan, Musco Poidl Pezzoli, and Bergamo, Accademia Carrara,1989) 66, is in very similar taste, as are smaller terracotta figures in Zeri's collection. 
A Sample was taken by Mrs Doreen Stoneham of the Oxford Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History tJf Art in October 1986 and thermo-luminescence tests Suggested that it had been fired between 1736 and 1836 (ref. 38l-y-29). 

@@NEW:172
172. Profile head of a warrior
17.2 cms. (height from chin to forehead); 33. I cms. (width)
@@PROCESS
Terracotta of a beige colour, partially covered with paint, now discoloured and flaking. The paint still cove ng much of the helmet is a dark grey. That on the face is a paler grey. There are traces of gliding on the crest of the helmet. The thickness of the relief varics between 3 and 5 cms. The relief is only a fragment but the edge behind the head and the corner behind the cresting of the helmet appear to be original. 
No provenance is recorded. 
The Greek profile and parted lips and rich flowing locks suggest the idealized portraits of Alexander the Great. The relief is probably Italian. It could date from the sixteenth, or the seventeenth, century but it more likely to have been made in the eighteenth or nineteenth, given the sympathy for, and knowledge of, Greek, as distinct from Roman, art which it reveals. 



@@NEW:173
173. Ganymede with the Eagle 
220.1 cms. (height, including integral marble base); 74.5 cms. (length, across the wings); 45.3 cms. (length of base); 29.2 cms. (width of base)
@@PROCESS
White Carrara marble. There are grey patches in the marble below the youth's right knee and at the back of the eagle's head and a rusty vein across the youth's chest. There are repairs to the dog's nose and its left car (the latter is now loose). There are chips missing from the eagle's left wing at the tip and from behind the other wing. The sub-base is carved from a separate block of marble and so is the portion of the base to proper left together with the dog seated on it. The eagle's left wing is separately carved and added: the join is now loose. The drapery blown around in front of the youth's genitals is also separately carved, and presumably an addition which was not originally planned. Cleaned by Miss Western of the Department of Antiquities early in 1964. Mounted on a painted wooden pedestal. What must be the group's Victorian pedestal survives in the basement store: it is of Siena (flecked mustard yellow) marble of rectangular plan with canted sides and an arched front panel. 
Given in 1937 by Mr Henry Donner (Annual Report (1937), 34). Placed on loan to the Cecil Jackson Room in the Sheldonian Theatre basement in March 1964. Retrieved and placed on the sill of the central window of the staircase to the Upper Galleries of the Department of western Art in August 1989. 
The only record of this sculpture seems to be the entry in the Annual Report for 1937 (p. 34) recording it as a work by Thorvaldsen given by Mr Henry Donner. It is not by Thorvaldsen, but by an Italian, or at least by a sculptor working in Italy, at the same period. The insipid sentiment, boneless grace, and considerable technical virtuosity  typical of 'sculptors such as Tadolini in Rome or of Giovanni Maria Benzoni in Milan in the two decades following Canova's death. The cutting of the marble is in many passages very fine (for instance in the eagles feathers, and the bark of the trunk), in the manner associated with skilled Italian craftsmen, but some of the drapery is routine and that which falls down beside the trunk is obviously designed to provide another vertical support. The bridge of marble between the index finger of the youth's left hand and his thigh was presumably intended to be removed after safe transport from the sculptor's studio. The support behind his left heel could however not be dispensed with prudently. 

@@NEW:174
174. Head of a bishop saint 
41.5 cms. (height); 50 cms. (length from top of mitre to chest) 
Terracotta, pinky orange to beige in colour. The mitre is open at the top and the head has been clawed hollow fr(nn above. The cope has been modelled out of a separate piece of clay and this has been reinforced with clay from below to form a solid base. A hole has been pushed through this base to join the hollow in the head There  firing cracks in the neck to proper right and, less conspicuously, across the beard. There are chips at the rim of the cope to proper right and there is a patch of plaster of Paris in the rim to proper left. 
Bought for £1,200 from the Arcade Gallery (Paul Wengraf), The Royal Arcade, 28 Old Bond Street, London W1, in December 1966 out of the George Flood France Fund with a contribution from the Regional Fund administered by the Victoria and Albert Museum. The work was probably reserved in October. It was registered on 9 December. 
lan Robertson wrote to Hugh Wakefield of the Victoria and Albert Museum soliciting support for the. purchase of this terracotta on 25 October 1966, praising the 'subtlety and distinction' of the modelling which he regarded as 'comparable with the quality of a painting by the elder Tiepolo'. Publishing it in the Annual Report for 1966 (p. 47) he considered it as the 'most noteworthy' of the five pieces of sculpture acquired in that year. In this case his enthusiasm was, it seems, supported by experts in the field. A letter from Charles Avery of the Department of Sculpture at the Victoria and Albert Museum to Ian Lowe on 8 December indicates that the idea that the terracotta was an eighteenth-century Venetian work came from the Keeper of his Department, John Pope-Hennessy. Avery proposed Govanni Bonazza (1654-1736) as the artist and cited his figure of St Zeno completed in 1708 for the altar of St Antonio in the duomo at Montagnana (C. Semenzato, 'Giovanni Bonazza', Saggi e memorie, 2 (1959), 293, fig. 9), but also pointed to Giuseppe Bernardi ('11 Torretto') as a possibility. Robertson had already mentioned Bonazza in his letter to Wakefield in October and the terracotta had been registered as probably by him. 
It is true that a similar type of bearded saint is found in works by Bonazza and Bernardi (sec, for the latter, C. Semenzato, 'Giuseppe Bernardi detto il Torretto', Arte veneta,12 (1958),177, pl.196), but the style of sketchy modelling with its deliberately smudged treatment of the features, the pupil of the bishop's right eye being almost indistinguishable, the beard expiring amid the lightly scribbled ornament of the cope, the opening of the lips left as a torn line, suggests a sculptor influenced by the sfumato of such late nineteenth-and early twentieth-century sculptors as Rodin, or, still more, Medardo Rosso. The introspective, even ghostly mood seems modern and so does the whole shape of the bust which is designed to give an apparitional, floating, character impossible to relate to a socle. (On arrival in the Museum the head was supported on an ebonized wooden stand from which it was emancipated on 4 January 1967 by Mohammed Saleh, during which operation a nut and a bolt, seven inches long, were removed from the back--as recorded in a note by Hugh Macandrew in the Register.) 
Doubts concerning the antiquity of the terracotta are reinforced by the thermo-luminescence dating of sample.' taken from the head in April 1974 and October 1986 bv Mr's Doreen Stoneham of the Oxford University Research Laboratory for Archaeology and the History of Art which indicated that the piece was fired less than 150 years ago (ref. 81-m-62 and 381-y-33). The probability of the work being modern docs not make it a forgery. It might be a historical portrait in much the same spirit as Gemito's Charles V (No. 38), and, considered as such, it certainly possesses genuine merit. 

@@NEW:175
175. Ornamental pediment involving cupids and two putti supported by scrolls 
14.2 cms. (height); 17.8 cms. (width of base moulding)
@@PROCESS
Bronze, with fire-gilding won in parts to reveal a warm orange brown natural patina (most obvious on projecting knee of uppermost cupid). Lost-wax cast. The reverse is hollowed. There are distinct file marks in the lower part of the reverse. The circular interstices of the design--six in all, of two sizes--drilled out of the metal. There is a crack in the scroll on the proper right side of the relief. 'B.1114 . [EF ligature]' is painted in white in the hollow reverse of the uppermost cupid. 
Given bv C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889. 8.1114 in his catalogues. 'Bought 10 / -', according to his notebook catalogue, without provenance or date but after 8.1106 (No.176) and probably in the later l880s to Judge from the number and the manner of its insertion. 
See No. 176. 


@@NEW:176
176. Ornamental pediment involving two winged putti, a mask, and a vase of flowers 
13 cms. (height excluding ring); 15.8 cms. (length of base)
@@PROCESS
Bronze, with gilding (possibly fire-gilding, possibly a varnish) much worn to reveal a dull pale brown natural patina. Lost-wax, cast. The reverse is irregularly hollowed. The circular interstices of the design--six in all, of one size--are drilled out of the metal. 'B.-- 106. EF ligature]' is painted in white on the reverse of the vase. 
Given by C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889. B. 1106 in his catalogues. No provenance or date of acquisition given, but presumably acquired after the compilation, in 1857, of his preliminary catalogue, in which it is nor included. 
The pediment is of very similar character to No. 175. The children's faces have the same round eyes and dimpled chins and curls--suggesting the type so popular in Venice in the late sixteenth century (sec Nos. 82, 188-9, 225). They are also modelled in the same way, as those in No.175, with elegance and naturalism sacrificed to the convenience of easily cut out or drilled out edges or apertures. The fact that the three putti in No. 175 are equipped with quivers and the uppermost with a bow (confused with the scrollwork) indicates that they represent Cupid and two companions whereas in this case the winged putti could be angels. This pediment unlike No. 175 is also fitted with a suspension ring and the base moulding has projections with screw holes. 
Pediments of this size and character carved to adorn both secular and sacred (objects: mirrors, bronze plaquettes, especially paxes, Limoges enamel portraits (there is one in the Nelson Atkins Museum, Kansas City), or even the three visible faces of a wall clock. A Venetian origin is suggested not only by the children's faces but by the similar character of the triangular pierced ornaments on the sides of the gilt bronze monstrance for the staurotheca of Henry of Flanders composed of fragments of the True Cross in the Treasury of St Mark's in Venice This monstrance was probably made in 1618 when the reliquary was placed on the altar of the Holy Sacrament in the Basilica (sec H. R. Hahnloser (ed.), Il tesoro di San Marco, ii (Florence,1971), no.140). These ornaments not only involve cherubim with heads like the putti and very similar scrolls but the casting is rough and the treatment of the apertures identical to that in the pediments. The backplate of a Hanukkah lamp in the Victoria and Albert Museum (M. 418-1956) which is datable on armorial evidence to the early seventeenth century is also in a very similar style and handling. 


@@NEW:177
177. Oval frame of strapwork involving cherubim and angels 
30.5 cms. (height); 23.0 cms. (width)
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a chocolate patina, fire-gilt on edges of the strapwork (but by some means which involved the application of gold leaf, for the distinctive overlaps of the leaves are evident on the edges of the strapwork top right and lower left). The metal is torn and cut at the junction of the wings of the lower cherub. Mounted against red velvet. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888, given later in the same year. B. 1050 in his catalogues. Purchased for £15 at the sale of the collection of Matthew Uzielli at Christies, London,17 April 1861, lot 670, using 'Whitehead' (presumably the dealer T. M. Whitehead) as his agent; previously in the Roussel Collection. 
Fortnum, who was sparing with his superlatives, described this simply as 'very beautiful in design and execution'. He considered it as probably Florentine of about 1570, And also noted that a cup or shell for holy water had been detached from below the lower cherub. He was repeating the views of J. C. Robinson given in his Catalogue of the Various Works of Art Forming the collection of Matthew Uzielli, Esq. of Hanover Lodge, Regent's Park London, 1860), no. 605), except that Robinson thought that it might be either Venetian or Florentine. Fortnum supposed that a devotional painting would have filled the franc-a mirror, he noted, had 'recently' been fixed in place. The heraldic device (crest or badge) of an eagle with open wings, its breast bitten by the serpent it holds in its talons, which appears as a relief where the strapwork rises up into an ogee crown, and the motto 'SEMPER ARDENTIUS' chiselled into the metal, have not been identified--Michael Maclagan points out that the motto is not in Dielitz and he has not traced it elsewhere. It might, however, be an impresa. The 'smaller Talman volume' in the Ashmolean includes a number of frame designs of a comparable but not very similar character, notably one (p. 117) attributed to Naldini, with figures incorporated in strapwork (probably for a coat of arms), and one (p. 114) attributed to Federigo Zuccaro involving strapwork and a cherub's head (K. T. Parker, Catalogue of Italian Drawings in the Ashmolean Museum (Oxford,1956), no. 755). 

@@NEW:178
178. Door fixture in the form of a lion's head roaring, for the suspension of a handle or knocker 
13 cms. (height); 12 cms. (width)
@PROCESS
Bronze with a dull green and brown natural patina and patches of verdigris, rubbed in small areas at the edges to reveal a yellow metal. Hollow behind. 'B / --54 / [EF ligature]' in white paint on interior with a small square paper label placed diagonally with blue printed border inscribed '8 / 1054' in ink. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 7 January 1888 and given later in the same year. B. 1054 in his catalogues. 'Bought in Rome’ according to his notebook catalogue, with no date, but presumably after the compilation in 1857 of his preliminary catalogue, in which it is not included. 
The handle or knocker would have taken the form of a ling passed through the loop joining the lion's lower jaw with the projection below. Fortnum catalogued this 'vigorously modelled' fixture as of the early sixteenth century, but it could easily be later in date. He noted that it was inspired by ancient Roman art and speculated that it might even be antique, describing the patina as that which comes from burial. 

@@NEW:179
179. Door-knocker in the shape of a lyre, decorated with a half-length woman restraining two lions by their manes 
28.5 cms. (height); 23.7 cms. (width); 15.3 cms. (width of scrolls at top); 4.1 cms. (nipple to nipple)
@PROCESS 
Bronze with a dark chocolate brown natural patina, palest where most handled. Very heavy, lost-wax, cast. The head and arms of the figure and the back legs of the lions are solid; the torsos of the figure and the lions open behind. A square piece of iron, chamfered at the top, is inserted as the knocker's hammer. A small patch of metal has been inserted in the back of the lion to proper left. There have been many blows and dashes to the surface, but most detail has apparently been reproduced from the model. 'B / --96. / [EF ligature]' is painted in white on the inside of proper right scroll at the top. 1,ent to the Museum by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888 and given by him later in the same year. 8. 1096 in his catalogues. Bought in 1876 'from the Late Miss Ellen Rigby' (cf. No.181) according to the large catalogue, for £10 according to the notebook catalogue. 
This type of door-knocker exists in many versions including the following: Bayerisches Nationalmuseum, Munich (see catalogue of that collection by H. R. Weihrauch (Munich, 1956),108, no.132); Bischoffsheim Collection, now untraced (W. Bode, Italian Bronze Statuettes of the Renaissance, ii (London 1908), no. CLXXV); Staatliche Museen, Berlin-Dahlem (5045; see L. Planiscig, Venezianische Victoria and Albert Museum, London (1592-1855); Meyer-Ilschen Collection, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt (cited by Weihrauch, loc cit.). Another version was with the Arcade Gallery in 1962. Fortnum knew only of the Victoria and Albert version which he regarded as the 'fellow' of his own (that is as having originated on the other valve of the same palace door). There are many variations both in the general shape (if the models were taken from the same moulds they would have been rough and altered in each case) and in the handling which is in all cases bold. For instance, the Victoria and Albert Museum's version, that in Berlin, and that in Paris are all tighter in composition than the Ashmolean version with less space between the woman's shoulders and the arms of the lyre and with less space above her head. The scroll projecting at the figure's lower abdomen is rather more salient in the Ashmolean version than in the Munich or Victoria and Albert versions and it is different in form-there is a sort of flat strapwork in the Berlin version. The latter version also has an ornamental comb in the figure's hair and has a bearded bacchic mask at the top between the scrolls of the lyre concealing the ring hinge. 
There exist nineteenth-century copies of this type of knocker: one is in the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore (no. 54.4, bought from Seligmann, Rey and Co., New York, 1917), and another in the Art Institute, Chicago (1973.375). In both cases the detail, although in some respects clearer (especially the ornament on the scrolls which is at best smudged in some of the versions cited above), is not chiselled and the reverses are obviously sand-cast and much less crude than is typical of Renaissance knockers. 
There is a related type of door-knocker also in the shape of a lyre and with lions climbing down each scroll arm, their tails curling around it, their front paws supporting a projecting shell handle, and their heads turned up-but with a whole length figure standing between them and not touching them. The figure is a nude Hercules, his left hand on his hip, his right brandishing a club, in the examples in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge (M29-1917) and in the Rijksmuseum J. Leeuwenberg, Beeldhouwkunst in het Rijksmuseum (Amsterdam, 1973), 387, no. 657), but is more commonly a draped female. Planiscig, illustrating two of the latter (one once in the Pierpont Morgan Collection, inscribed 'GIO. ANTO. TAVANI', now untraced, and one in the Kunstgewerbemuseum, Berlin, noted the close relationship in the figure style between these and the work of the Venetian sculptor Tiziano Aspetti (op. cit. above, 576-7, pls. 632-3). The figure in the Morgan version is indeed derived from a sta.tuette of Judith (known in many versions, among the. best being the cast in Sir Brinsley Ford's collection, that in the Museo Civico, Padua, and that sold at Christies, London, 5 July 1988, lot 83), which is attributed to Aspetti on account of its resemblance to his signed statuettes of Charity and Temperance (dated 1593) on the rail of the high altar of the Santo in Padua. It is possible that Aspetti, having invented one figure, would then repeat it with little variation for a different purpose, but such an adaptation is also probable in a lesser artist, indeed an artisan founder such as were probably responsible for the design as well as the casting of all but the most extraordinary knockers. But if the design of this 'very harmonious and well-compacted model', as Fortnum justly described it, is by a leading sculptor then Aspetti is certainly a likely candidate. 
This type of knocker may well have been traditional in Venice. The most important source for our knowledge of the knockers there is the set of forty-five drawings made by the Flemish artist Giovanni Grevembroch in 1758 of 'Battori, Batticoli e Battioli in Venezia' as it is headed--published in facsimile in G. B. Brusa as Raccolta di Battitori a Venezia in 1879 (the only copy in Britain is in the National Art Library, Pressmark 204.b.26). No. 5 in this series, located at Palazzo Longo al Servi in Rio della Sensa, has a full-length figure of Hercules between a pair of downward climbing lions on lyre formed scrolls. No. 26, located at the Monastero di S. Zaccaria, has similarly arranged lions but with less torsion in their poses, suggesting an older pattern. No. 27, located at the Monastero di S. Giuseppe, is similar to no. 5, but with a full-length standing female figure. No. 28, located at Levi dal Banco, has a nude boy between less twisted lions (and no shell handle). Nos. 29 and 30 'dei Belilios' and 'dei Bendana' are similar to no. 5, the latter with a Bacchus, as is no. 32, at Palazzo Garzoni a San Samuele, where the full-length figure is a personification of Hope, and no. 39 at Casa Loredan a 'S. Maria Nova' where it is a nude male hero. Half length female figures are also found on Venetian knockers recorded by this source-for instance no. 16, at Casa Diedo a S. Giovanni in Oleo, where, however, the figure is really a mermaid whose split fish legs curl up to form the arms of the lyre. There is, however, no reason to suppose that these types of knocker were only made at Venice. A pair of lions on a lyre-shaped knocker will be found, for instance, in an example recorded on a palace in Bologna (see Gaetano Marchetti, 'Antichi ferri e bronzi d’arte nelle porte degli edifici di Bologna (Bologna, 1969), 21, fig. 16), although admittedly a Bolognese knocker could have been made in Venice. 


@@NEW:180
180. Door-knocker formed of winged monsters and a grotesque mask 
24.2 cms. (height); 23.3 cms. (width, head to head)
@PROCESS 
Bronze with natural dark chocolate patina, paler in more salient parts (e.g. foliate beard and hair and noses of monsters). Heavy, lost wax, cast, open behind. A circular piece of iron is inserted as the knocker's hammer. An iron cross-bar, concealed by the binding of the tails, is designed to fit a ring hinge. The linear detail of hair, furrowed brow, and feathers is reproduced from rough and rapid work in the wax model and retains much burr. 'B / --95 / [EF ligature]' painted in white on the reverse. A blue-bordered square paper label inscribed 'B 1095' in ink is also attached to the reverse. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 7 January 1888, and presented later in the same year. B. 1095 in his catalogues. 'Bought in london in 1849', according to the large catalogue; 'at a Sale there at that date and for 2 guineas, according to the earlier notebook catalogue; 'in London in 1850' according to the preliminary catalogue compiled in 1857 (p. 45); it is presumably the 'smaller bronze knocker' on which he spent 2 guineas before 1851 according to his 'Memorandum of prices paid'. 
No other versions of this knocker have been recorded. The lack of rhythm in the composition and the awkward compilation of parts--wings, fish tails, lions' paws, human heads--is hard to match in other inventions of this sort, however grotesque. The basic scheme may be matched in at least one knocker known to have been on a Venetian Renaissance palace door by the mid-eighteenth century: no. 34 in the collection of drawings of such knockers made by Grevembroch (see No. 179) shows one at Palazzo Grimani a San Luca, composed of a pair of dolphins, their curling tans bound together at the top, and supporting below, between their heads, a grotesque mask with foliate projections. There is also some similarity with a type of knocker consisting of a mermaid and a triton curling round with a grimacing mask below (Metropolitan Museum, New York,17-190-2096; Victoria and Albert Museum 555-1877; and K. Pechstein, Bronzen and Plaketten, Staatliche Museen preussischer Kulturbesitz (Berlin,1968), 15, pl. 4). 
Fortnum regarded this knocker as a 'fine vigorous model roughly but artistically executed and cast from the wax' and catalogued it as north Italian and of the late fifteenth or early sixteenth century-but in his notebook catalogue simply as of the first half of the sixteenth century. The grotesque ornament is more easily associated with work of the second half of the sixteenth century and could be of a still later date.

@@NEW:181
181. Door-knocker in the form of Neptune accompanied by a pair of hippocamps 
45.5 cms. (height); 30.1 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a dark brown natural patina worn to yellow on the noses of the hippocamps and on the shell handle. Heavy, lost-wax, cast, solid in the ends of the tails of the hippocamps, in the head and limbs of Neptune, but hollow in the god's chest which is open behind. A chaplet pin remains in his chest; there is a hole where the pin was passed through the metal on the other side. A piece of iron (4.5 cms. square) is inserted as the knocker's hammer. Much of the surface, and Neptunes flesh especially, has been extensively tooled with small scratchy lines, apparently in the metal, but the equine parts of the hippocamps are textured with small circles which look as if they have been impressed into the soft wax model with an anular punch (in a few areas the cleaning of the metal after casting has removed this texture). The bold lines defining wings, hair, mane, and the like also look as if they are cur into the soft model rather than the hard metal. There  small perforations in the chest of Neptune and above the nose of the hippocamp to proper left. There is a threaded insertion for a missing extension to the trident handle. '8 / --97 / [EF ligature]' painted in white on the reverse of the tall of the hippocamp to proper right. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 7 January 1888 and presented later in the same year. Numbered 1097. 'Bought from Miss Ellen Rigby according to the large catalogue, for i.10 in 1876 according to the notebook catalogue, having been bought in London 'about 1846' by her father George Rigby (see also No. 179). 
Fortnum was aware of another version of this type of knocker. It was one said to have been on the door of Ca Pesaro in Venice, 'taken by Edward Cheney' and (in 1883 when Fortnum was compiling his catalogue entry) still in the possession of the Cheney family. According to Fortnum this was the same one that was reproduced by Matthew Digby Wyatt in his Metal and its Artistic Design (London, 
1852), pl. 7, as from the Pisani Palace and 'regarded as the handsomest in Venice' (ibid. 73). When exhibited at the Burlington Fine Arts Club in 1879, however, the Cheney knocker was said to have come from the 'Comer palace'. Numerous other versions are now known, many of them modern. Fortnum observed, in tracing his back to about 1846, that this was '1ong before the modern casts were fabricated for sale. Consulting Grevembroch's drawings of old Venetian knockers made in the mid-eighteenth century (for which see No. 179) we find that examples were then to be seen on Palazzo Gradenigo at Santa Giustina and at Palazzo Lezze alla Misericordia (his nos. 1 and 2). He also illustrates one with hippocamps and shell handle at the Monastero della Celestia (no. 37) from which a Neptune had perhaps been detached. 
The following list of versions of this type of knocker is certainly not complete, but is longer than the fullest previously published (J. Balogh, Katalog der ausändischen Bildwerke des Museums der bildenden Künste in Budapest (Budapest, 1975), i.164-5, no. 213). It is arranged alphabetically by location. Alnwick Castle, Northumberland; Antwerp, van Beuningen Collection (Phoenix, 4 (1949), 171); Baltimore, Walters Art Gallery (514.3); formerly Berlin, Oscar Huldschinsky Collection (Berlin sale of 1928, lot 91, cited by Balogh, op. cit.); Boston, Gardner Museum (C. Vermeule, W. Cahn, and R. HaLdley. Sculpture of the lsabella Stewart Gardner Museum (Boston,1977),155, no.194); Budapest, Museum of Fine Art (Balogh, op. cit., no. 213); Budapest, Adolph Kohner Collection (Ernst Museum Aukciói, XLVIII, no. 313, cited by Balogh, op. cit.); Cambridge, Fogg Art Museum (1953.41, Fogg Art Museum Annual Report (1952-3), 14; Chicago, Art Institute (1950-1171; no. 34 in Art of the Renaissance Craftsmen (Fogg Art Museum, May 1937), when in Jellinek Collection, Buffalo); Detroit, Institute of Art (47.14 Bulletin 32 / 1 (1952-3), 6); formerly Durham, N. Carolina, Duke University (sold Sotheby's, New York, 30 May 1987, lot 68); Edinburgh, Royal Scottish Museum (1877.20.41); London, British Museum (H. Weihrauch, Europäische Bronzestatuetten (Brunswick,1967), pl. 184); Milan, Mylius Collection (A. Pettorelli, Il bronzo e il rame nell’arte decorativa italiana (Milan,1926), fig. 181); formerly Munich, Marczell von Nemes Collection (Munich sale of 16-19 June 1931, vol. ii, lot 413, pl. 91, cited Balogh, op. cit.); Munich, Bayerisches Nationalmuseum (65.132, in reserve); formerly New York, William Randolph Hearst Collection (Hammer Galleries (1941), 58); Padua, Museo Civico (B. Candida, 'Un bronzo di Alessandro Vittoria', Prospettiva, 28 (1982), 79-82, fig. 4); Paris, formerly Bischoffsheim Collection, now untraced); formerly St Petersburg, Botkine Collection (catalogue of 1911, pl. 46, cited Balogh op. cit.); Trieste, Civici Musei di Storia e d'Arte (Candida, op. cit., fig. 5); formerly Venice, Antichità Pietro Scarpa (Burlington Magazine, Supplement (June 1972), pl. XX); Venice, Museo Civico Correr, version (a) (Candida, op. cit., fig. 2); version (b) (no. 215); version (c) (no.1179, formerly Conte Cernazzi, Udine); Venice, Palazzo Loredan, Santo Stefano (Candida, op. cit., fig. 1); Venice, Palazzo Pisani (see Wyatt, op. cit., also L. Moretti in I Pisani di Santo Stefano e la opera d'arte del loro Palazzo (Venice n.d.) 177, pl. 50); also two replicas of the same stolen about a decade ago from the Palazzo Pisani doors, one reproduced Country Life (12 July 1962), 90; Venice, Palazzo Clary, 1397 Zattere, Consulat Général de France (Candida, op. cit., fig. 6); formerly Vienna, private collection (auction of 1928 cited by Balogh, op. cit); formerly Vienna, Castiglioni Collection; Vienna, Kunsthistorisches Museum (no. 5973; Weihrauch, op. cit., pl. 183). 
Modern casts were known to Fortnum, as we have seen, and the versions recently stolen from Palazzo Pisani were acknowledged as replicas. Among those listed above that I have seen, those in Boston, Detroit, and (formerly) Durham impressed me either as very inferior late casts or as poor nineteenth-century imitations, while that on Palazzo Clary, Venice, looks like a modern replica. Variations on the model are also known. In one of these Neptune, accompanied by lions like those in No.179, is sticking his trident into the rump of one and stroking the other (an example, unnumbered, is displayed in the Museo Nazionale di Palazzo Venezia in Rome and another is illustrated in T. G. Jackson'S Dalmatia (Oxford, 1884), 268). 
Since at least the early years of this century knockers of this type have been associated with the name of the Venetian Sculptor Alessandro Vittoria, but even the best of them (that in Palazzo Loredan, Venice) has some clumsiness which would be unllkely in a truthful reproduction of a model by him. Weihrauch (op. cit.) illustrates a terracotta Neptune in the British Museum attributing it to Vittoria. The head possesses a similar terribilità and the right arm is similarly raised, but the anatomy ls more correct and the modelling more fluent than in the equivalent figures on the knockers. To describe the knockers as Style of Vittoria is not unreasonable but there is no evidence that he had assistants engaged in turning out door furniture, and we know that he did not cast his own figures (for the independent founders employed for his San Sebastian see The Genius of Venice (Royal Academy, 1983), 388, S. 37--entry by M. Leithe-Jasper).
The subject would seem to illustrate the Quos ego from Virgil's Aeneid--the moment when in Book One the irate god of the ocean calms the storm which, urged by Juno, the winds had stirred up to destroy the Trojan fleet. Neptune utters the words 'Quos Ego ('Whom I') of a sentence he is too angry to complete. The subject was extremely popular in bronze sculpture of the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries both north and south of the Alps: among the most notable groups are that in the Cleveland Museum of Art (74.273) and those in the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore, (54.49 and 54.2441--both reproduced in E. P. Bowron, Renaissance Bronzes in the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore (Baltimore, Md., 1978), 47 and 55) and that sold at Sotheby's, London, 8-9 December 1988, lot 104, while the most famous of all is the superb bronze in the Victoria and Albert Museum (A. 99-1910), long attributed to Vittoria, but recently published by Anthony Radcliffe as perhaps by Vincenzo Danti and reflecting his competition design for the Neptune Fountain in the Pallazzo della Signoria, Florence (Burlington Magazine (Dec 1988), 932). 
The quality of the Neptune knockers vanes greatly. The Ashmolean's is not one of the best—'the workmanship', Fortnum conceded, ‘is rather coarse’. Indeed the modelling, especially of the hands, the lower abdomen, and breasts, one of which is oddly merged with the shoulder, is bad. Among the more visible of the versions listed those in the British Museum, the Correr (a), and Vienna are certainly far superior, although also full of faults. The type of finish also varies and I have found nothing like the texturing on the Ashmolean's bronze in any other version. There are numerous variations in the character of the trident (usually stumpy, often bent) and the position of the heads of the hippocamps. The wings of the hippocamps are unusually soft and rounded in the Ashmolean's version; they are usually spiky although those of the version in Palazzo Loredan, Venice, are unique in resembling spiney dorsal fins. Arms behind Neptune's head, as in the Ashmolean's version, are not unusual—cf. London, British Museum, Budapest; Correr (a). They never seem well integrated into the composition and are sometimes manifestly added after casting (as in the British Museum's version).The arms in the Ashmolean's version--(blank) three bends (blank), with a coronet with seven pearls and an ample mantle--are hard to identify without mantle but could be, Fortnum observed, of the Bianchetti and Ghislieri of Bologna, or of the Bandini of Florence--but Michael Maclagan notes that there are numerous families using this shield, but relatively few with a right to a coronet. 

@@NEW:182&183
182 and 183. Pair of furniture handles in the form of scrolls, suspended from a lion mask, terminating in dogs, an eight pointed star between their front Paws 
5.8 cms. (height of each handle); 5.7 cms. (width of each handle); 3.9 cms. (height of lion mask); 2.7 cms. (width of lion mask) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze, fire-gilt. The gilding is tarnished in parts and in others is worn to expose a brown natural patina. Lost-wax casts, slightly hollowed behind. Fixed to the centres of the arched panels in the two doors of a small nineteenth-century cabinet of pale mahogany (68.6 cms. high; 43.1 cms. wide, 35 cms. broad). 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. B.1056 and 8. 1057 in his catalogues. 'Bt. Florence'--presumably after 1857 when his preliminary catalogue, in which they are not included, was compiled. Attached by him to the cabinet in which he kept his collection of rings, which cabinet, by accident, has remained in the care of the Department of Antiquities. 
The handles were catalogued by Fortnum as Italian of the sixteenth century--they are surely of the second half of the century and perhaps of the early seventeenth century and are likely to have been made in Florence (where they were acquired) in which city volutes of elegant form ornamented with overlapping scales or coins were much favoured. The dogs and star may well have been suggested by the impresa of the family for which they were made. 

@@NEW:184&185
184 and 185. Pair of door-handles in the form of busts of Bacchus and Ariadne (Bacchus only traced) 
12.8 cms. (height) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze of a dark brown to black patina. Heavy, lost-wax, cast. Hollow behind but the head solid (or filled). An iron prong inserted into the rear of the chest has been broken off. 
Given by C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889 Nos.1062 and 1063 in his catalogues. 'Bought in Florence'. 
Dated by Fortnum to the second half of the sixteenth century and described as 'coarse'-the coarseness is not untypical of much routine ancient Roman work and it is possible that the Ariadne has in the past been mistaken for a genuine Roman work. It is curious that in Fortnum's preliminary catalogue of 1857 he lists a male head handle without a companion and observes that it is of fine execution (47, no.12), but there is no unpaired male head handle in his subsequent catalogues. 


@@NEW:186&187
186 and 187. Pair of door-handles in the form of identical busts of laurel-crowned men in Roman armour 
10.3 cms. (height)
@@PROCESS
Bronze of a brown natural patina with traces of black varnish. Lost wax casts, hollow behind but the heads solid (or filled). Threaded iron prongs are inserted in the back of each neck. The surfaces have been roughly chiselled. In one case the bronze is dented on the nose. There is a firing crack across the lower neck of one and a portion of bronze is missing from the proper left shoulder of the other. 
Given by C. D E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889 Nos.1073 and 1074 in his catalogues. Not in his preliminary catalogue of 1857, presumably acquired after that date. 
Dated by Fortnum to the sixteenth century, they  'coarse work', as he also observed, and could have been made at any time in the sixteenth, seventeenth, or eighteenth century. 



@@NEW:188&189
188 and 189. Pair of door-handles in the form of male and female bacchic busts 
11.3 cms. (height of male); 11.4 cms. (height of female) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze of light inferior alloy with a natural chocolate patina. Hollow, probably lost-wax, casts, open behind. Iron prongs are inserted in sockets behind the necks. Small screw holes at lower edges of chests (torn in one case) Small holes at both sides of both chests (possibly from chaplet pins). The half on the back of the female head is unmodelled. 
Given by C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889. 8.1071 and 8. 1072 in his catalogues. Probably the 'Head of Bacchus' and 'Ariadne the companion' dated c.1570, nos.10 and 11 on p 47 of his preliminary catalogue compiled in 1857. 
These handles were dated by Fortnum to the sixteenth century. The original models may well have been Venetian of the late sixteenth century since they resemble the curly haired types much favoured in the decorative bronzework associated with Roccatagliata (see No. 82). However, these casts  'coarsely executed', as Fortnum also observed, and could have been made at any time in the succeeding centuries. The male head is among the types of handle still made in Venice by the Valese Foundry (Madonna dell'Orto 3535) and retailed at their shop (793 Calle Fiubera, S. Marco) for 155,000 lire. This foundry commenced business in Venice in 1913 but no doubt took its models from earlier foundries. Modern examples may be seen on many doors in Venice (for example on those of the offices of Adriatica, Zattere 1413), but ancient ones are rare~those on the late sixteenth or early seventeenth-century vestment cupboards of the Sagrestia Grande of S. Stefano (of which seven were in place in 1989) appear to be original. An example of the male bust together with a 'similar female model are included in a display of such 'testine decorative in the Musco Davia Bargellini in Bologna. (These are published in R. Grandi (ed.), Museo Civico d'Arte Industriale e Galleria Davia Bargellini (Bologna, 1987) 112-13, no. 163, entry by R. d'Amico, suggesting that they are of Bolognese manufacture: they are the fifth from left in the middle row of the upper illustration and third from right in the top row in the lower illustration.) What appears to be a version of the male bust is in the Heinz Schneider Collection (W. D. Wixom, Renaissance Bronzes from Ohio Collections (Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio,1975), no. 125). A slightly larger variant of this, but better modelled and more crisply finished, is in the Victoria and Albert Museum (reserve, A.11-1944). Nos. 5735, 5736, 5737, 5738, 5739, and 5741-1859 in the same museum are of very similar character but with drapery in place of fruit swags, as is another handle in the Schneider Collection (Wixom, op. cit., no. 123). Such handles are also very common in the sale-rooms but are seldom illustrated. 

@@NEW:190&191
190 and 191. Pair of door-handles in the form of identical bald male Moorish heads, rising from chests cut in a scroll shape 
8.7 cms. (height) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze, with red varnish deteriorated to black and worn to reveal metal with a 'natural greeny-brown patina (much more worn in one case). Lost-wax cast, open behind, with projections, integrally cast, with threaded perforations. 
Given by C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889. Nos. 1066 and 1067 in his catalogues. 'Bought in Italy', presumably after 1857 when the preliminary catalogue, in which they are not included, was compiled. 
Fortnum dated these to the sixteenth century and commented that they were of 'good work'. The exotic taste is more suggestive of the seventeenth or eighteenth centuries. A somewhat similar bald Moor with big cars, a frown, and terminated at the neck with an undulating hne serves as a handle to the front door of No. 67 Via degli Alfani in Florence (noted autumn of 1987). 

@@NEW:192&193
192 and 193. Pair of door-handles in the form of identical, nearly bald, male heads with moustaches, rising from drapery 
9.2 cms. (height) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze, of natural pale greeny brown patina. Lost-wax cast, hollow behind, with integrally cast bars across back (one with a threaded brass prong attached to it). One handle (of slightly darker colour) had a patch inserted on top of the head. There are circular plugs in both necks. 
Given by C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889. Nos 1064 and 1065 in his catalogues. 'Bought in Italy'. Not in his preliminary catalogue of 1857. 
Fortnum dated these to the sixteenth century and commented that they were of 'good work'. The oriental features are more suggestive of the exotic fashions of the seventeenth or eighteenth centuries. A pair of moustached and pigtailed Chinamen of similar character but in rococo surrounds serve as handles to the doors of No. 29 Via Ricasoli in Florence (noted autumn 1987). Very similar handles  still cast by at least one Florentine foundry, that of Enzo and Renato Rafanelli, who sell them for 50,000 lire each at their showroom in Via dcl Sole. Similar but miniature heads sometimes serve as handles in ornate early eighteenth-century Italian cabinets.

@@NEW:194&195
194 and 195. Pair of door-handles in the form of a male bust portrait 'en négligé', one the reverse of the other 
9.8 cms. (height) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze or brass, natural yellow patina with the remains of oil gilding. Lost-wax cast, open behind. Rusty iron prongs  fitted into the' bronze at the back of each neck. 'B / --60 / [EF ligature]' and 'B / --61 / [EF ligature]',  painted in white on the reverses, also on one reverse there is a square blue bordered paper label placed diagonally inscribed in ink 'B / 1060'. 
Given by C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889. Nos.1060 and 1061 in his catalogues. Bought in Florence for £2, presumably after 1857 when his preliminary catalogue, in which they were not included, was compiled. 
Fortnum dated these to the seventeenth century and noted the portrait-like character of the heads. Such open coats and nightcaps were especially typical of portraiture in the early eighteenth century. That door-handles could be based on portraits is not an absurd idea. The ornamental heads employed in the borders of the mid-sixteenth-century sacristy door of st Mark's in Venice by Jacopo Sansovino--and which serve as handles--were known to represent Sansovino, Titian, and Aretino (Ghiberti had of course earlier depicted himself in a similar location) and that the Aretino was copied for humbler situations is suggested by his boast that his effigy was so familiar that it even served as a door handle ('see his Lettere full'arte. ed. C. Cordie and F. Pertile (Milan,1957-8), Ill, i. 67 and 211 n. 340-a reference I owe to Jennifer Fletcher). 

@@NEW:196
196. Furniture handle in the form of two fishes, with crossed tails, respecting 
11.7 cms. (height); 15.6 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a natural dark brown patina and a few traces of gilding. Open behind. Hole in gills of fish head facing right (perhaps from a chaplet pin) imperfectly filled with a round plug. 'B / --55 . / [EF ligature]' painted in white in hollow. 
Given by C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889. 8.1055 in his catalogues. 'Bought Florence', presumably after 1857 when his preliminary catalogue, in which it is not included, was compiled. 
Catalogued by Fortnum as Italian of the sixteenth century, and certainly handles of this size and type were then employed in Italy, for example on the' outsides of the arms of heavy chairs, as may be seen in portraits of the period, stich as the seated woman by Pontormo in the Städelsches Kunstinstitut, Frankfurt. There are  five handles involving similar fish in the Bardini Collection, Florence, but all are designed to hang from the tails. A similar design was employed for gold buckles in Paris in the last century. 

@@NEW:197&198
197 and 198. Pair of small door knockers or handles ornamented with rams' heads strapped together 'dos à dos'
12.6 cms. (height); 12.05 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze, with a dark brown and pale green natural patina, rubbed to yellow at the six-sided moulded knocker, with iron ring suspenders on an iron cross-bar. Cast open at the back. 'B / . --58 / [EF ligature]' and 'B / --59 / [EF ligature]' is painted in white in the reverse hollows. 
Given bv C. D. E. Fortnum on 15 November 1889. B. 1058 and B.1059 in his catalogues. 'Bought Florence', presumably after 1857 when his preliminary catalogue, in which they were not included, was compiled. 
Catalogued by Fortnum as dating from the 'last half' of the sixteenth century. There is a similar handle / knocker in the Victoria and Albert Museum (15-1869, in reserve) which retains a bronze mask fitting from which the iron ring suspender issues, and another is in the Bardini Collection, Florence, also with such a mask. A Florentine origin is suggested by the pierced lyre-shaped stone supports of the balustrade on the façade of palazzo Covoni-Daneo in Florence, nearly opposite Palazzo Medici-Ricardi, the scrolls of which terminate in cocks' heads in a manner reminiscent of these rams' head knockers. This Palazzo, it is worth pointing out, retains its original door fittings--knockers incorporating paired cocks and handles in the form of cocks' heads--presumably designed by the architect Gherado Silvani in the 1620s. 

@@NEW:199
199. Small door-handle and knocker in the form of a finger ring with a bezel 'diamante in punta' issuing from the wolf's mouth 
6.9 cms. (height); 5 3 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a dark brown natural patina, yellow between masks and on the point of the diamond. Some verdigris. Solid cast. 'B. --53. [EF ligature]' is painted in white on the inside of the ring. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 7 January 1888 and given later in the same year. B.1053 in his catalogues. Purchased for £1 in Rome in 1865. 
Fortnum considered this as Florentine of the fifteenth or early sixteenth century knowing that the 'diamante in punta' was an emblem of the Medici family favoured in that period. Two ring handles with diamond knockers are ill the Victoria and Albert Museum (8876-1861--in reserve--and 7400-1860 on display). Another is in the Museo Bardini in Florence. What  are certainly modern handles of a similar model with no connection with the Medici are fixed to doors in Corso dei Tintori and Via de' Conti. The 'diamante' remained in favour with the Medici as a subordinate family device throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries as may be seen, for example, from the sides of the sarcophagi of the grand dukes in S. Lorenzo, and it was used for door-handles in both Palazzo Pitti and Palazzo Vecchio (Sala degli Elementi).

@@NEW:200
200. Lockplate for a portable chest decorated with trophies and captives, together with a hasp decorated with a woman bearing fruit and flowers 
16.3 cms. (height of plate); 16.4cms. (width of plate); 19 cms. (length of hasp); 3.8 cms. (width of hasp at hinge end); 2.6cms. (width of hasp at lock end) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a chocolate brown patina with some traces of a dark varnish in the hollows. Solid lost-war cast. The modelling appears to be in the wax. A patch of bronze is Inserted above the shoulder of the captive bolt. 
Bequeathed by J. R. Jones,1951 (see below). 
Over forty lockplates of this pattern and design are recorded. The best and most recent discussion of them and the fullest hst will be found in Charles Avery, 'Fontainebleau, Milan or Rome? A Mannerist Bronze Iock-plate and Hasp', in Italian Plaquettes (National Gallery of Art, Washington: Studies in the History of Art, 20,1989), 291~307. Avery points out that they cannot have been fitted to heavy Cassini. but were well adapted to lighter travelling chests and have survived on a couple of these. 
The elongated figure on the hasp, the strapwork cartouches, and the elegant vases have suggested the School of Fontainebleau to some scholars but these motifs were popular outside France and are all of Italian origin. Connections have also been made with Milanese work. Avery remarks on the similarities with work by the Leoni and in particular on the affinity between the female figure on the hasp and the allegorical figure of Patience on the reverse of the medal of Ercole II d'Este by Pompeo Leoni (c.1533-1608). The Leoni family of sculptors and medallists worked in Rome as well as in Milan and Madrid and there is armorial evidence, which far outweighs that of style, which points towards Rome as a city of origin for these lockplates. 
Over half of the recorded examples have coats of arms. Some of these arms, like those on the hasp in the Ashmolean Museum's example, have not been identified and are, in any i'ase, somewhat abbreviated in character and summary in execution. Others seem to be the arms of north Italian families and one even belongs to a Dutch family (ibid. 305, no. 40), but the majority are of Roman families, and these include those on some of the finest examples of the type, and on what is perhaps the most beautiful version of all, that in the Wallace Collection (ibid. 303, no.14) which is larger than any other (22.8 cms. high) and of a very coppery metal, gilt. This example has on its hasp the arms of Mattei impaling Gongaza, presumably for the marriage of Marchese Asdrubale Mattei with Costanza, daughter of Alfonso Gonzaga, which, as Avery points out, could not have taken place much before 1585. Also of good quality is the version, again gilt, once in the Boston Athenaeum, recently given by Nereo Fioratti to the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (1986.8), which has the Orsini arms on one side, the Savelli arms on the other, and the two impaled on the hasp, which probably records the marriage of Ludovico Orsini with Giulia Savelli before 1585 when the former was put to death (ibid. 304, no. 25). Also apparently of good quality is the version once in the possession of the late John Hayward with the arms of the Colonna impaled with those of the Peretti on the hasp, probably recording the important marriage of 1589 between Marcantonio Ill Colonna with the niece of Pope Sixtus V, Felice Orsini Peretti (ibid. 304, no. 27). There are other versions with the Orsini and Savelli arms ill the Hermirage and in the National Gallery of An in Washington (ibid. 303- 4, nos. 9 and 22). 
The imagery seems curiously martial given these marital armorials, but it would be odd even for a soldier: female as well as male captives  not unexpected but both have been warriors, the breast plate in the trophy above the female having distinct projections for the bosom. This idiosyncrasy of the design seems to have excited no comment. It makes it even more surprising that it became standard for lockplates of this pattern . 
Many of the surviving versions  good but obviously of lesser quality than those cited above. There are many minor variations to be observed of which the most obvious are the character of the masks in the square compartment in the centre of the lateral panels (a leonine satyr head in the Ashmolean version but more commonly a young female head) and the character of the ornament in the compartments below (a somewhat incoherent arrangement of scrolls and masks in the Ashmolean version but more commonly cartouches, sometimes containing arms). Avery notes that the Ashmolean version is identical with one of two examples in the Museo Nazionale di Palazzo Venezia, Rome (his no.19, reproduced and discussed by P. Cannata, Relieve e placchette del XV al XVIII secolo (catalogue of exhibition at Palazzo Venezia, 1982), 71-2, no. 68), and another in a private collection, Rome (his no. 32). He considers all three to be suspect. Examination of the Ashmolean bronze reinforces suspicions, for there is no sign of a lock ever having been fitted, or of the plate being subjected to any use. The plate would have been fixed to the carcass of the chest with nails in the four corners of the plate which would have had onamental heads matching the mask ornaments in the square compartments, but if these nailheads were ever employed in this case they have left no dent or even scratch. 
It is likely that the Ashmolean lock plate is a copy probably made towards the end of the last century when such items began to be eagerly collected. The detail is much sharper than is the case with one of the four versions in the Victoria and Albert Museum (4817. A) which is obviously an aftercast, but a wax cast might have been reworked prior to the bronze casting. In that case, or if the wax model was simply a measured copy, the bronze would be smaller than the prototype and indeed this is true of this bronze and the other two cited by Avery (the one in a private collection is said to be 16.5 x 16.5 cms., that in Palazzo Venezia 17 x 17 cms.) when compared with those of better quality. It remains to identify the prototype for these copies. A good candidate is the example in Dallas Museum of Art (not in Avery's list but see The Wendy and Emery Reves Collection, Dallas Museum of Art,1985), 176, entry by D. T. Owsley). This is approximately 1 cm. larger than the Oxford version (the width is given as 6 7/8 inches) It is of the same design but gilt and considerably worn. Without being a work of the quality of the finest examples mentioned above, all details, whether the three birds in the arms, the fluttering ribbons above the helmet or the wriggling contours of the ewer's handles, are far finer and more nervous than in the Ashmolean version. There are differences in the most minute details, such as the decoration on the bodies of the ewers or the loops of pattern beside the strapwork frame of the keyhole, which have been omitted or simplified, and in the framing mouldings, which are less numerous and thicker in the Ashmolean version. 
Assistant Keepers in the Department recall that the bronze lockplate and hasp was among the Items bequeathed by J. Reginald Jones, but it is not registered, does not appear on any of the lists, and ls not mentioned in the papers related to that bequest. The list made in March 1951 after Jones's death seems likely to provide a complete and accurate guide to what was taken to the Museum on that occasion (see Nos. 277-9 for the circumstances) but after the death of his widow Edith Mary Jones on 18 June 1962 less precise records seem to have been made of the additional items which, in late July of that year, were taken to the Museum. Some of these additional items had not been included on earlier lists since Mrs Jones had a separate collection of her own from which the Museum was free to pick.


@@NEW:201
201. Water spout in the form of a half-length armless monstrous winged satyr 
18 cms. (length)
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a natural dark brown patina. Small patches of verdigris. Cast with the length of pipe, which has been broken off. Missing the tap. 
Presented by Mr Henry J. Pfungst FSA in 1908 (Annual Report for that year, 8). See also Preliminary Essay and Nos. 203, 233, 234, 427. 
There is a very similar spout in the Victoria and Albert Museum (1246-1888) which retains a tap in the form of a putto holding a staff. Bell, recording the acquisition in the Annual Report, noted that it was said to be north Italian of the Paduan School and of the late fifteenth or early sixteenth century. The type of satyr certainly is derived from the creatures favoured by founders in Padua and Ravenna. Such models were still in use later in the sixteenth century, but this piece may well date before 1550 and is included here for comparison with other items of this kind. 

@@NEW:202
202. Tap handle in the form of the wolf suckling Romulus and Remus 
7.7 cms. (height exclusive of screw 2 cms. in length) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a very dark brown natural patina and some traces of black varnish. Heavy, probably solid, cast. The modern brass screw 'soldered into place. 
Presented in 19o8 by Mr Max Rosenheim (Annual Report (1908), 8). 
Bell, recording this acquisition in the Annual Report, dated it to the sixteenth century. Conservatism in such items makes it hard to exclude a later date. Rome must be a possible place of origin, but Siena a more likely one, on account of the subject-matter--the badge of Siena being the Wolf and twins (legend having it that it was founded and takes its name from Senio, son of Remus).

@@NEW:203
203. Water spout in the form of a monstrous head 
15.7cms. (length) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a dark brown natural patina. Fitted with the length of copper pipe (sawn off). The threaded tap (missing its handle) is cast separately. The geometric pattern is chiselled in the metal. Inscribed in red pajnt on underside of spout between collar and tap 'Given / by / Mr Henry J . Pfungst / 1904'. 
Presented by Mr Henry J. Pfungst FSA in 1904. For Pfungst see Preliminary Essay, and Nos. 201, 233, 234, and 427. 
C. F. Bell, recording this acquisition in the Annual Report for 1904 (p.1), described it as 'Venetian' and a valuable addition to the Renaissance collection. There seems no special reason to consider it as Venetian or indeed Renaissance, although it might be. The type of monster is not improbable as an ornament in the early eighteenth century. 

@@NEW:204
204. Water spout in the form of a stylized fish head with a tap handle in the form of a lion supporting a shield 
17.2 cms. (height of tap); 23.2 cms. (length of spout) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze or brass with a dark brown natural patina worn to yellow ill a few salient areas (eg. the edge of the shield and leafy ornament over the fish's eyes). The handle is solid cast. 
Given by Messrs. Durlacher of Bond Street in 1904. 
It is perhaps no coincidence that the firm of Durlacher (which had been in business throughout the second half of the nineteenth century) had, together with Asher Wertheimer, purchased the collection of bronzes belonging to Henry Pfungst who also gave the Museum an item of old Italian plumbing in the same year (No. 203). Such pieces were probably not of much in the Annual Report of 1904 (p. 1), observed that it was 'Venetian' and made a 'valuable addition' to the Renaissance Collection. The crispness of this cast is quite different from any authentic Italian fitting of this kind dating from the sixteenth or seventeenth century but does suggest the sort of work found in mid-nineteenth-century Italian public fountains such as those in Piazza della Scala, Milan. There is a pair of very similar lion tap handles in the Museo Bardini, Florence. 

@@NEW:205
205. Two-stage cupboard ornamented with terminal caryatids 
146.5 cms. (height); 82.5 cms. (width, at base moulding); 49.5 cms. (height of upper caryatids); 7 cms. (length of upper caryatids); 4 cms. (width of upper caryatids including 'ground' of 0.5 cms.); 68.2 cms. (height of lower caryatids); 7 cms. (length of lower caryatids); 4 cms. (width of lower caryatids) 
Walnut, with burr walnut. Many dents and scratches and much worm damage, on account of which the caryatid to proper right in the higher pair has lost much of her nose. 
Bequeathed by A. G. 8. Russell in 1958 (see also Nos. 33940, 577). According to the card index of his collection it was bought by him on 19 May 1924 from 'Comm. Prof. Elia Volpi of Piazza Torino, Florence' for 8,000 lire (£8112s. 8d). 
The cupboard was regarded by Russell, and by the Museum on acquisition, as Florentine and of the sixteenth century; it resembles Italian work of the second half of this period and the terminal figures with small scroll arms, over which the drapery is hooked here, together with the scale ornament on the upper pair's piers, are found in ornamental Florentine work (most notably in the herms of Hercules in the great walnut desk in the Sala dell'Udicnza in Palazzo Vecchio, Florence) and the motif of a tasselled swag overlapping the scaled tapering piers is closely paralleled in an 'Armadino pensile' in a Florentine private collection (Palazzo Vecchio: Committenza e collezionismo medicei (Florence, 1980) , 208- 9, no. 390). 

@@NEW:206
206. Cassone ornamented with shields and masks 
60.8 cms. (height); 181.5 cms. (length); 58.5 cms. (width of lid); 18.5 cms. (height and width of the three panels containing masks, from the narrow mouldings outside the bead and reel ornament) 
@@PROCESS
Walnut. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in October 1894 and bequeathed in 1899. F. 10 in his catalogues. 'Bt. Florence' according to both catalogues, perhaps in 1875--see below. 
Fortnum dated this Florentine cassone to the middle twenty years of the sixteenth century: it might however be later in date than 1560. Although he does not enter the date upon which he acquired it this is likely to be 1875 when he purchased the other Florentine furniture in his collection-a pair of seventeenth-century chairs, another sixteenth-century cassone, a sixteenth-century stool and table (F. 11, F. 12, F. 13, F. 14, F. 15). These purchases cannot have been unconnected with his rebuilding of the Hill House, Stanmore. 

@@NEW:207
207. Cassone ornamented with acanthus leaves at the corners 
62 cms. (height); 176 cms. (length cms. (length); 59 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Walnut with some inlay, perhaps of holly, for a thin string band framing the principal panel of each side, with an iron lock (old but not original) and evidence of original pin hinges. 
Given by Mr and Mrs Edmund Houghton in 1937, rogether with No. 208. 
The cassone is of similar size to No. 208 and has identical gadrooning, lion's paw feet, and raised central portion to the lid. Here too extra interest is provided by what are additions to the front corners although here they are acanthus leaves and extend from the lion's paw foot. The Houghtons also gave a roughly blocked-out wooden model purporting to be the model for the pedestal of one of the pair of marble holy water stoups in the Duomo at Siena made in the early 1460s by Antonio Federighi (1420-90) but surely the abandoned start of a modern copy of the same, also some alabaster and marble sculpture of dubious status (see the Annual Report(1937), 33). There is a facetious account of their dreadul collection and their generosity in bestowing items from it upon friends rash enough to express polite enthusiasm for them in the first volume of Kenneth Clark's autobiography. 

@@NEW:208
208. Cassone ornamented with harpies at the corners 
61.7cms. (height); 177cms. (length); 56cms. (width); 33.5 cms. (height of each harpy) 
@@PROCESS
Walnut (bleached) with some inlay, with iron handles and lock. The shaped inlay for the cartouche of the central coat of arms and for the pair of boys restraining wolves (which are engraved in the wood) might be a nineteenth-century addition. The lid must be a replacement although it is made from old wood. The harpies are carved out of separate pieces of wood and although battered have none of the worm damage found in the corners behind them. The nose of the harpy to proper left has been broken off and one scrolled wing end has been broken off and reattached. The scrolled headdress and some of the nose of the other harpy have been broken off as has the end of one scrolled wing. 
Given by Mr and Mrs Edmund Houghton in 1937, together with No. 207. For their other gifts see the entry for No. 207. 
The harpy to proper left has a moustache which is unusual. On acquisition the cassone was regarded as Italian and of the second half of the sixteenth century; it surely is Italian and if the engraved inlay is authentic it must date from the seventeenth century. A similar cassone with gadrooned base, applied harpies, and engraved inlay was acquired by the National Gallery of Scotland in 1989. Another is in the City Art Gallery and Museum, Birmingham. 



@@NEW:209
209. Cassone ornamented with gadrooning and fluting 
53 cms. (height); 140.7 cms. (length of lid); 47.5 cms. (width of lid) 
@@PROCESS
Walnut. The plinths beneath the lion's paw feet must be additions. Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. F.11 in his catalogues. 'Bt Florence 1875', according to large and notebook catalogues, for £20 according to the latter. Kept in the hall at the Hill House, Stanmore. 
This cassone was dated by Fortnum 1530-40. The sarcophagus shape of the chest certainly became popular about then but this is densely ornamented with mouldings fashionable in Florentine wood carving of the second half of the sixteenth century. It is an excellent design: more varied in its contrasts of hollow and relief and more lively, on account of the radial 


pattern of its gadrooning, than the best-known cassone of this type which is now in the Museo Nazionale of the Bargello (Palazzo Vecchio: Committenza e collezionismo medicei (Florence,1980), 209-10, no. 393; F. Schottmüller, I mobili e l'abitazione del Rinascimento in Italia (Stuttgart, L928). 65, no.153)). The ornamental style may be compared with that of the map cupboards in Palazzo Vecchio carved to Vasari's designs by Dionigi di Matteo in 1563 and with the stucco designed by Ammanati for the Loggia di Giunone in the same Palace. (Both comparisons are made by Maddalena Trionfi Honorati in the catalogue cited above.) But by comparison with genuine sixteenth-century carvings of this sort its execution appears mechanical and, despite the claims presumably made for it by the dealer from whom Fortnum bought it, it must have been made as a copy or imitation because it has modern hinges and no wear. When owned by Fortnum the cassone retained a crimson velvet cover on the raised slab of its lid. 

@@NEW:210
210. Casket with applied winged masks and sirens 
26.3 cms. (height); 51 cms. (length); 28 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Poplar. The sirens, the winged masks, and the stud ornaments  aH carved separately and applied. The.re is a separate compartment with a sliding top in the lid of the casket, but the top is missing. Mouldings at the back of the short side of the casket to proper right are missing, as are one round small and one long stud. The base is riddled with woodworm. The lock and hinges, are original. The letter 'F' is carved twice on the outside of the plain back panel of the casket. 
Probably the 'Italian casket 16th century' presented by Henry J Pfungst in 1899. 
The casket is probably Italian and the style of ornament suggests the late sixteenth or early seventeenth century. 



@@NEW:211
211. Casket with lion's paw feet, ornamented with curling strapwork 
31.8cms. (height); 46.3 cms. (length 32 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Walnut. The interior of the casket is lined with pine painted red. There is a separate compartment with a sliding top in the lid of the casket. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. F. 8 in his catalogues. Bought in Florence,1875, for £2, at the same date, and possibly from the same source, as many of the other pieces of Italian furniture. 
Fortnum catalogued this as Italian of c. 1550. It may be later in date. The curling strapwork, which graduates into scale ornament where the curled ends seem to overlap with others behind, is found on larger Florentine Cassini, as is the curious imitation of basketwork (anticipating the ripple mouldings of seventeenth-century ebony frames). Larger caskets of similar style but superior execution are displayed on a table in the Sala degli Elementi in Palazzo Vecchio, Florence, and on a table in the painted room in Palazzo Davanzati, Florence. 

@@NEW:212
212. Casket with lion's paw feet, ornamented with scales and other ornament 
21.5 cms. (height); 40.5 cms. (length); 29.5 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Walnut. The casket retains old, perhaps original, divisions inside. There is a separate compartment with a sliding top in the lid of the casket. The hinges are modem replacements. The original lock remains in place but is broken. 
Provenance unrecorded, but possibly bequeathed in 1899 by C. D. E. Fortnum, for a manuscript list of 'Objects now at The Hill House Stanmore but to go to Oxford' made late in his life includes 'a casket of carved chestnut or walnut wood with sliding top lid at present in our bedroom' to which no number had been assigned. It was perhaps acquired with No. 211. 
The casket is probably Italian and the style of ornament suggests the late sixteenth or early seventeenth century. The initials IHS, abbreviating the name of Jesus, with the Cross above the bar of the 'H' and three nails below it, carved in the cartouche of the central compartment of the front of the casket, below the keyhole, indicate an ecclesiastical origin. 

@@NEW:213
213. Casket with three compartments 
18.5 cms. (height); 34 cms. (length); 27 cms. (depth)
Rosewood and ebony with silver. The mouldings are all of ebony. The silver is inlaid in lines forming geometrical patterns on the lid and side. The hinges are of brass, the lining is of red velvet, and the miniature knob on the drawer is of bronze --only the last of these three features looks original. The lower portion of the cabinet is a drawer. The main body of the cabinet opens as a chest. The raised portion of the lid forms a separate compartment opened by a sliding top. The catch to the drawer is broken and hangs down below the casket. There is a small catch which releases the sliding top in the mouldings on the short proper left side of the top. The lock in the front for the 'chest' is a modern addition and wall of the casket has been thickened with mahogany to accommodate it. The inside part of the front foot to proper left has been lost. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. F. 9 in his catalogues. 'Bt. Florence' according to his notebook catalogue. 'Ebony Casket £1-18s-6d'  is written under the year 1859 in his MS 'memorandum of prices paid'.
Fortnum dated this as 1530 in his notebook catalogue and as 1530-40 in his larger catalogue. C.F. Bell in a manuscript annotation to the larger catalogue speculated that it might be Tyrolese and of the eighteenth century. A casket of very similar form, a little larger in size, but with the inlaid lines said to be of brass with brass scrolls on the feet, was lot 122 at Christie's', London, 4 May 1989, and catalogued as nineteenth century. The three compartments of such caskets were presumably intended for pens, stationery, and private correspondence  respectively.

@@NEW:214
214. High-backed chair ornamented with dolphins and scrolling foliage
134.5 cms. (height) 47 cms. (length); 40.3 cms. (width)
@@PROCESS
Either maple or beech with some evidence of a red stain, with some additions in walnut. The cresting of the back together with the moulded framing at the top of the back is carved from a single piece; it is very roughly finished behind. Each post is carved from a single piece. The front legs and the stretchers are each carved from a single piece. The ornamental carving below the seat is carved from a single piece: this has been broken and recently regaled. there is minor woodworm damage in several areas. Some pieces of wood have been lost from the proper right front leg where it is pierce. The panel of damask set in the back is modern: when removed, the traces of preformation for caning can be seen on one side. Such perforation is clearer when the damask-covered seat, which is also modern, is removed. The upper part of the frame of the seat carved with hadron ornament partly covering the holes is modern. There are traces of a paper label behind the dolphin to proper left of the cresting inscribed in ink in French in a nineteenth-century hand: 'No. 17 / chaise / haut Oless ... / Dauphin...'
Bequeathed by C.D. E. Fortnum in 1899. F. 12 in his catalogues. Bought by him in Florence in 1875 for £6.
Fortnum considered this chair to be Florentine of the seventeenth century and he noted (it is added in the notebook catalogue as a footnote) that dolphins were armorials of the Pazzi (an eminent Florentine family). The gadrooning of the seat frame is very much in the style of one of the sarcophagi which Fortnum bought in Florence at the same date (see No. 209). The chair may well have been supplied by the same dealer. The whole chair has been dismissed (verbally, by curators in the museum and visitors to the museum) as of modern manufacture, and it is certain that this style of seventeenth-century furniture was reproduced in abundance in the last century, but the roughness of the carving behind, the eccentricity of the knees to the legs with their pierced scrolls meeting the gadrooning, and the undisguised repairs all suggest that this might be an authentic seventeenth-century piece. It is perhaps Tuscan but unlikely to be connected with the Pazzi: dolphins were a common ornament in furniture. The label, which seems to refer to the dolphins, may date from the chair's period with a Florentine dealer--such dealers often traded in French. The chair has been identified (verbally) by several experts in the field of British furniture as British of the period of William and Mary. The posts in the form of superimposed Corinthian pilasters, the flattened dolphins on the broken arch of the crest, and the baluster stretchers can all be paralleled in the suite of gilded and japanned beech chairs sold at Christie's, 23 May 1969, lot 112, one  of which is illustrated and discussed by Gervase Jackson-Stops in the Treasure Houses of Great Britain, (catalogue of the exhibition at the National Gallery of Art (Washington, DC, 1985), 164-5, no. 94). the chair could have been taken to Florence by an English resident only 25 or so years before Fortnum acquired it there. 

@@NEW:215
215. High-backed chair 
ornamented with scrolls and cornucopia 
128.5 cms. (height); 45 cms. (length); 38 cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Probably maple. The cresting of the back, together with the moulded framing at the top of the back, is carved from a single piece; it is very roughly finished behind. Each post is carved from a single piece. The front legs and the stretchers are each carved from a single piece. The front proper right leg is certainly modern and has a modem turned dowel. The stretcher to proper right is of oak and probably also a replacement. The ornamental carving below the scat is carved from a single piece. The panel of damask set in the bai'k is modern, and so too is the framework around it carved with leaves. At the sides this modern framework includes the bead moulding which makes it appear continuous with the older parts of the Iop and bottom of the chair back. The back was presumably originally caned. The damask-covered seat is also modern. When it is removed, perforation for caning can be seen. The upper part of the frame of the scat, which is carved with scale ornament and partly covers the holes, is modern. 
Bequeathed by C. D. E. Fortnum in 1899. F. 13 in his catalogues. Bought by him in Florence in 1875 for £3. 
Fortnum considered this chair to be Florentine of the seventeenth century. The scale ornament of the scat frame is very much in the style of one of the sarcophagi which Fortnum bought in Florence at the same date (see No. 209). The chair may well have been supplied by the same dealer. The whole chair has been dismissed (verbally both by curators in the museum and by visitors) as of modern manufacture, and it is certain that this style of seventeenth-century furniture was reproduced in abundance in the last century, but the roughness of the carving behind and the undisguised repairs suggest that this might be an authentic seventeenth-century piece. The chair was bought together with No. 214 but they are not a pair and when seen in a good tight are not the same colour. As with No. 214 the chair has been thought to be British of the late seventeenth century. 



@@NEW:216, 217, 218
216, 217, and 218. Three side chairs decorated with cockle-shells, weedy fronds, and dolphins (only one illustrated) 
105.4cms. (height); 50.2 cms. (width); 59.7cms. (length) 
@@PROCESS
Beech, gilded on aH visible surfaces. The water-gilding is not likely to be original. On No. 218 some of it is certainly a replacement. The gesso has not however been superimposed. The gilding is worn in some areas to expose the ruddy grey-brown bole preparation on the gesso; elsewhere the bole has flaked and the gesso chipped; varnish has been applied to tone the gilding and consolidate these losses and gold paint has been used since by the Museum workshop to cover some of the gesso. On all chairs each post is of a single piece of wood joined to the curved top rails below the eyes of the dolphins. These top rails, together with the cockle-'shell crest, are of a single piece which is also joined to the top of the splat. Shrinkage has caused the joins to open conspicuously across the top of the splat (in a line passing through the eyes of the child's head) in all three chairs. The joins between the front seat rail and the front legs have also opened. The bird's eye punchwork on the ground of styles, around the cartouche of the splat, on the chair rail, the lower part of the front legs, and the rear of the back legs is now very indistinct with the central dot not always legible. It appears to have been in the wood but it may have been obscured by the gesso in regilding. The lines in the petals of the flower-heads on the styles are similarly obscured. The chairs 216, 217, and 218 are incised on the inside of the back rail of the scat frame under the splat with the numbers I, Ill, IV; chairs 216 and 217 are also incised with II and IV on the insides of the stretchers of the drop-in scats and 218 is also incised with V on the inside of the front rail of the drop-in seat--these are more deeply cut than are the numbers on the scat frames. The Italian damask of the drop-in seat is a modern covering of about 1970. 
Given by Mrs F. R. Weldon in 1934. Bought by 'Martin'--a dealer--as lot 134, Christie's, London, 5 November 1929, the sale of Colonel Claude Lowther, MP, JP, of Herstmonceux Castle (1872-1929). A photograph in the catalogue shows the chairs in a room in the castle. Lowther purchased the castle unfurnished in 1913 and is likely to have bought the chairs after that date. No. 218 has been on loan to the Victoria and Albert Museum since 1964. 
At least 17 chairs of this type, now generally dated to between 1725 and 1740, are recorded. As William Rieder was the first to point out when publishing a set of four in the Metropolitan 
Museum ('Eighteenth Century Chairs in the Untermyer Collection', Apollo (Mar. 1978),181-5), these can be divided into at least two sets-the Ashmolean's three, together with two in the collection of Professor Truesdell of John Hopkins University, being different in construction and in detailing from the chairs in the Metropolitan Museum and in other collections. Professor Truesdell, who owns chairs from both sets, has examined these differences at length in 'A Puzzle Divided: English and Continental Chairs Following a Unique Design of the Early Eighteenth Century', Furniture History, 20 (1984), 57-60, pls. 76-80, pointing out that the heavier character of the Ashmolean set and the fact that in this set the shoe of the splat is not integraI with the back rail of the scat frame indicate continental rather than English craftsmanship, whereas the other set appear to be entirely typical of English work. When the ornament is compared it will be found that the Ashmolean chairs possess more boldness, plasticity, and linear vitality, although the others are of remarkable quality and indeed greater delicacy. Particularly revealing is the greater concavity in the Ashmolean chairs of the shell-like forms springing from the knees of the cabriole legs and the more varied curvature of the fronds below, and the fish tail above, the child's head at the top of the splat. 
The chairs have long been admired as among the finest of their period in existence. The cabriole legs and vasiform splat are characteristic of English chairs of the early eighteenth century but neither the character of the ornament, nor its wit-the top rails formed as of dolphin-like fishes biting the styles, echoed in the forms of the front feet; the fish head on the 'scat rail reappearing in the cartouche of the splat with a foreshortened body wriggling behind it in swirling waves--can be matched in other English furniture of this period. Nor indeed is the relationship between the double curves of splat and styles, which make the spaces between as beguilingly beautiful as the solid elements themselves, easy to parallel ill English furniture design even at its most sophisticated. 
The idea that Italian craftsmen were involved in the creation of these chairs seems to have been suggested by both John Hayward and Alvar Gonzalez-Palacios before the alien construction of [he Ashmolean chairs was emphasized by Truesdell. Various hypotheses could be advanced to explain the origins of these two sets: the most probably would seem to be that the Ashmolean set were made in Italy for the English market, or by Italian craftsmen in England, and the other set copied from them by some of the best native craftsmen. 
The donor, Mrs Weldon, was the widow of the Linacre Professor of Comparative Anatomy (who died 1906). Among the works of art given by her between 1915 and her death in 1936, and those which she bequeathed, are many of the greatest paintings in the Museum (Claude's Ascanius Shooting the Stag, Watteau's Le Repos gracieux, Drost's, Ruth and Naomi, Corot's Tuscan Hill Town, Bonington's Amy Robsart, Camille Pissaro' s Jardin de Tuileries, Orpen' s Chessplayers) but no other items of furniture except a Georgian card table. Since she purchased these chairs at a time in her life when she must have wanted less rather than more furniture for her own home it is reasonable to suppose that she had the Museum--and indeed the new room named in her honour--in mind.



@@NEW:219, 220, 221&222
219, 220, 221, and 222. Set of four wall pedestals for statues (only one illustrated) 
112.7cms. (height of each) 
@@PROCESS
Marble cladding on a stone core. Each pedestal is constructed in four parts: the plinth is of porto venere (black marble from Genoa with yellow veins of a distinctive liquid form, known in Britain in the eighteenth century as 'gold vein'); the base mouldings are of 
slightly grey veined white Carrara statuary marble; the principle pier is of white Carrara statuary marble with panels of mottled pink, yellow, and white marble (probably a pale rosso di Francia); the uppermost mouldings of white Carrara statuary marble. The pedestals have obviously suffered from frequent reassembling and  chipped at the joins between the different parts, as well as being dirty and scratched. 
Acquired in 1950 together with the busts of Popes Clement XII, Clement XIII, Innocent XIII, and Benedict XIV (which they still support)--see Nos. 22-5. 
The pedestals  flat with no mouldings behind and were clearly intended to be placed against a wan. It is most unlikely that they were made for the busts by Claus which they now support, for the plinths of the socles of these busts seem too small and their square form contrasts unhappily with the concave shapes of the pedestals. This concavity and the chamfered angles derive from the inventions of Borromini but their less sharp edges, less dramatic curvature, and more orthodox mouldings are characteristic of Roman architecture in the first half of the eighteenth century. The use of porto venere also suggests this date, but it is hard not to suspect that the plinth, where this is employed, is an addition to increase the height of the pedestals for the busts. The Iower height would have made them suitable for statues. To these arguments it may be objected that the socles of the busts by Claus might not be original, but it is impossible to imagine any style of socle which would mediate in an entirely happy manner between the busts and these pedestals. It was also very rare in this period for busts to be mounted on spreading pedestals. Straight columnar pedestals were used for busts in the second half of the eighteenth century: before that tapering term supports which compensate for and dramatise the pyramidal shape of the bust itself were favoured. On the other hand spreading pedestals are often found as supports for statues, especially small statues, in Roman palaces: those in wood in the gallery of Palazzo Doria Pamphili, those in travertine in the garden of palazzo Borghese and on the staircase of Palazzo Barberini are examples. 



@@NEW:223
223. Pedestal ornamented with swags and the heads of lions and goats 
17 8 cms. (height Including corner finials), 2'3 cms (length), 16.3cms. (width) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a ruddy chestnut patina darkened in parts. All the high relief ornamenti s separately cast and bolted to the main body of the plinth which is a hollow lost wax cast with thin walls, open beneath. The majority of the bolts appear to be original. The swags are not now fixed in their original place behind the ears of the goats. There is a strip ofire-gilt-bronze fixed, with modern solder, to the base moulding of the plinth. It has slipped on one side. This may not be an original feature. One of the fire-gilt bronze pomegranate finials on the corners of the upper surface of the plinth is missing. 
There are two attachment holes on the upper surface of the plinth 7cms. apart. 
This must be the 'beautiful pedestal of fine Cinque cento work bearing the arms of the Grand Duke of Tuscany' on which 'A Bison, an antique bronze found at L'Ariccia near Rome' was mounted when it was given to the University Galleries by Chambers Hall in 1855 (University Galleries Donations Book, 28). In 1888 when this little bronze was transferred from the Randolph Gallery (1888.1482 (76)) it was described as still wlth its pedestal but also as rest ing on a pedestal of polished porphyry 4 7/8" by 2 7/8" and 1 5.8" high 'having a giIt metal border round the bottom'--this porphyry plinth must have been intermediary between the pedestal and the statuette or possibly a recent replacement for this pedestal. By that date the bronze's connection with Chambers Hall had been forgotten. There is no record of the transfer of this bronze 'Bison' to the Department of Western Art but it has for over twenty-five years been on display as a 'bull of Apis' upon an ebonized pedestal of the' Marcus Aurelius type labelled in gold as fifteenth-century Italian and giving the provenance as 'Bodleian Collection' After transfer the pedestal must have been removed. The porphyry plinth may have been recycled at the same date--its dimensions correspond exactly with those of the slab upon which the reclining nude woman attributed to Cellini (No. 21) is now mounted. 
The pedestal cannot have been the original one for the little bronze Bull--it is too large and the Bull has a distinctive green patina which is quite different. Furthermore the Bull looks like an early Renaissance work whereas the pedestal, although hard to date for certain, does not. It is decorated with the arms not of the grand duke of Tuscany but of a prelate whose hat is on top with a bishop's six tassels hanging to either side of a shield quarterly, 1 and 4 a lion rampant, 2 and 3 on a bend between three fleur de lis three crooks (? perhaps hammers or shears). 

@@NEW:
224. Inkstand in the form of three sphinxes (with a lid decorated with a group of a standing nymph and seated satyr) 
16.2 cms. (height of each sphinx); 361 cms. (height of stand with groups on lid); 13.5 cms (diameter of rim mouldings above heads of sphinxes) 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a natural rich red chestnut patina worn to a yellow tan on nails and nipples, with 'some traces of a darker varnish. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. There is a conical ink pot of pale green blown glass (presumably a replacement) suspended within an iron ring. There are perforations in the thin wall of bronze in the backs of the wings; the' backs of the heads and wings and shoulders are not carefully finished, but the more visible areas very carefully tooled and polished. 'B / --76 / F' is painted in white on the rim below the rumps of the sphinxes, and below that 'No 60) 1855', crossed out (the same marks appear under the base of the crowning group). 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in October 1894 and bequeathed by him in October 1899. No.1076 in his catalogues. Purchased by him at the sale of the Uzielli Collection, Christie's, London, 17 April 1861, lot 666, for £42, using 'Whitehead' (presumably the dealer) as agent. 'It formerly belonged to Mr Bernal', that is Ralph Bernal, the great collector of glass, ceramics, enamels, arms, and armour and was lot no.1280 on the eleventh day of his posthumous sale,16 March 1855, where it fetched 30 guineas. 
The inkstand was very highly regarded by Fortnum -and not only by him; he mentioned that 'the late sig. Alessandro Castellani offered me £1200 for it.' It had been illustrated in J. C. Robinson's Catalogue of the Various Works of Art Forming the Collection of Matthew Uzielli, Esq. of Hanover Hanover Lodge, Regent's Park (London,1860), pl. 8, no. 600) which was adopted as the sale catalogue after Uzielli's death in the following year. Robinson described it as 'splendid' and dated it to 'about 1530.' The integrity of the ensemble was questioned by Bode on a visit to the Museum on 6 March 1903 as recorded by C. F. Bell in an annotation to Fortnum's large catalogue. He considered that 'top and bottom had in the first instance nothing to do with one another', the lower part being 'Celliniesque' and 'perhaps a hundred years later in date. Bell added 'It has long been my view that the thing as it stands is a rifacimento but in view of its fame & the great store set upon it by Mr Fortnum I should have hesitated to express it'. The group on the lid, generally now known as the Chastisement of Pan, exists in other versions, and is regarded as a product of the workshop of Severo da Ravenna. It must be an invention of the first years of the sixteenth Century (if not of the last of the fifteenth century) And it will be considered separately in the catalogue of the Museum's Medieval and Renaissance sculpture. 
There is evidence, however, that Severo's workshop was still active in the mid-sixteenth century (sec No. 9), so it is not Impossible that the lid is contemporary with the stand, and it certainly appears to have been originally cast with a heavy round base (and not subsequently fitted with such a base) to serve as a lid. Other versions of the sphinx stand support an elegant spiral group of a female nude figure flogging a recumbent, cowering, howling male figure, a group, far better suited to it in style and in scale, which it would be hard to date before 1550. It is worth speculating that the Ashmolean bronze might be the consequence of something akin to a 'mall-order confusion', for both groups could be described as the 'punishment of vice' and a bronze founder familiar with this old model might have cast it to fit the base by mistake. The alternative explanation would be that the old group was fitted to [he new base by a collector or a dealer just as a quattrocento painting might be given a cinquecento franc, at any time between the sixteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In any case there is no reason to doubt the antiquity of the stand, and Bell was correct to delete the word 'Modern' in Bodes description of it in Italian Bronze Statuettes of the Renaissance, i, (London, 1907), 28, as 'a modern copy of the Borghese inkstand by Cellini'. 'The Borghese inkstand' was the version of the stand together with the spiral flogging group with which Bode was familiar. It was then in the collection of Baron Alphonse von Rothschild in Vienna (Bode illustrated it, op. cit. ii, (1908), pl. CXLV) and was said to have come from Palazzo Borghese in Rome Its whereabouts are now not known, but it was in 1955 in the collection of Mrs Max Epstein in Chicago (according to J. Draper's 1980 revision of Bode). Other versions are in the Louvre and the Speed An Museum, Louisville. There is also a sphinx inkstand without any lid in the Victoria and Albert Museum (M. 358-1956) and a version of the spiral group designed as a lid, which might once have fitted over the stand in the Victoria and Albert Museum, is in the Frick Collection in New York (see J. Pope-Hennessy and A. F. Radcliffe, The Frick Collection, iii (New York,1970), 234-9). By an extraordinary coincidence Fortnum's preliminary catalogue of 1857, pp. 55-7, reveals that he bought a version of this group in Rome in 1851 but on a diff'€rent base consisting of kneeling tritons. He noted that it was very similar to the group in the private apartments of Palazzo Borghese attributed to 'John of Bologna'. It had been damaged in the siege of Rome in 1849. He had doubts of its antiquity and, probably for this reason, disposed of it. 
There are also versions of the spiral group which  not designed as a lid, but they are generally of lower quality. In addition to Giambologna and Cellini, the following names have been advanced in the hunt for the creator of the spiral group and the base: Pierino da Vinci, Ammanati, Domenico Poggini, Rustici, Taddeo Landini. The fullest discussions of the problem are those by Ulrich Middeldorf in 'Eine seltene Bronze der Spätrenaissance, reprinted in Raccolta di scritti, ii (Florence,1980), 303-8, and by Pope-Hennessy and Radcliffe (op. cit.). There has been little success in detecting other bronzes which might be by, or after, the same artist, but the youth on a seahorse in the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore, attributed to Ammanati (54.465) seems to me to be a related work. 
Were it not for their close association with the spiral flogging group, which must surely be Italian and has never been proposed as anything else, it would be tempting to suggest that [he stands were made north of the Alps. The version in the Victoria and Albert Museum is labelled as German or Flemish, but it is France that comes to mind. Sphinxes or harpies with a similarly sleek elasticity were popular with the school of Fontainebleau and can be found in works of art of all types from ornamental keys (see, for example, those in the Walters Alt Gallery, Baltimore, 52.88 and 57.698, in the Victoria and Albert Museum 5610, 5613, 5616-1859, or in the Musée de la Renaissance, Écouen, CL. 20991 or CL. 22147) to elaborate carved wooden cabinets (see, above all, the Dressoir aux harpies, Écouen, CL,. 20426, but also No. 323). The most familiar sphinxes in Italian bronzes of the sixteenth century are very different from these, but they are all made in Venice or the Veneto (see No. 226). If one looks to other centres and at works in other media, analogies may be detected. Middeldorf (op. cit. 307) cited the silver altar furnishings in St Peter's made by Andrea Gentile of Faenza for Cardinal Alessandro Farnese, which however are not sufficiently close to warrant all attribution. 
It remains to point out the variations in the five recorded versions of the inkstand. The wings of the sphinxes  tied together in the Ashmolean and the Louisville versions, but in the latter are enriched with garlands. The Ashmolean, Louisville, and Victoria and Albert Museum versions all have a base supported by claw feet. In the untraced Borghese Rothschild version, and those in the Louvre and Victoria and Albert, the wings of the sphinxes  hooked into projecting shells. There  other minor differences: for instance, in the Victoria and Albert version the wings  less feathery than those in the Ashmolean; the sphinxes there also have tails which are missing in the Ashmolean version. 
Lastly, since the sphinxes in these stands  often described as harpies it should be pointed out that according to the standard authority of the period, Vincenzo Cartari's Le imagini con la spositione de i die de gli antichi (Venice, 1556), 296, sphinxes had the face and breasts of a woman with great wings but were otherwise lions whereas (p. 293) harpies had the face of a beautiful but lean (magra) woman but in the rest of their bodies were birds with large wings and with hooked talon-s as they are described by Virgil in a passage admirably imitated by Ariosto. 


225. Inkstand supported by volutes adorned with lion heads and crowned by a cupid clutching flowers 
21.6cms. (total height); 10.6cms. (height of vessel); 11 cms (height of lid excluding part concealed by vessel); 
@@PROCESS
Bronze with a dark brown patina and traces of black varnish. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. The vessel fitted with a lead lining now decaying. Chaplet holes beside the masks on the lid. Inscribed 'B. / --87 / [EF ligature]' in white paint under one foot and '8 / -87 / [EF ligature]' on underside of lid. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in October 1894 and bequeathed 1899. No. 1087 in his catalogue. Presumably purchased after the compilation in 1857 of his preliminary catalogue, in which it is not included. 
In his notebook catalogue Fortnum dated the work to about 1580 but altered this to 1560. In his large catalogue he changed 1560 to 1540. C. F. Bell, annotating the latter, considered that it belonged to the period 1550-75 and to the 'School of Sansovino'. The decorative motifs, especially the female mask with drapery under her chin,  indeed characteristic of venetian ornamental art of the second half of the sixteenth century and so too  the features of the Cupid. Fortnum was aware of the similarity between his inkstand and another in the Victoria and Albert Museum (567-1865, formerly Soulages Collection) in which the same pattern of vessel is supported by three free-standing heraldic lions and the same pattern of lid acts as a base for (or has been adapted as a base for) a standing personification of Hope. Neither the lions nor the Hope seem as well adapted to the design. There are connections also with another inkstand, in the same museum (5908-1859), also with a Hope, but this time with Cupid supporters, and a spreading scroll-work base like that in the Ashmolean Museum. Bode also illustrates an inkstand similar to this latter (Italian Bronze Statuettes of the Statuettes of the Renaissance (London,1907-12), ii, pl. clix--then in the collection of Otto Beit, London, now at Blessington in Ireland, collection of sir Alfred Beit). On account of the character of Hope he was inclined to attribute it to Alessandro Vittoria. The statue must indeed be derived from an invention by Vittoria or a contemporary but it was surely an artisan not a leading sculptor who designed, or improvised, utensils of secondary quality such as these. A version of the inkstand in the Carrand Collection (no. 273), now in the Bargello, Florence, was noted by Bell as a repljca of the version in the Ashmolean Museum but without a lid. A pair of seated putti Clutching flowers, one very close to the putto here, the other in reverse,  included in an elaborate Italian inkstand and cover, dated 1566 in raised letters, which was lot 83 in William Newall's collection sold Christie's, London, 27-9 June 1922.

@@NEW:226
226. Inkwell (or basin) supported by three sphinxes 
6.6cms. (height) 
Bronze with a dark chestnut patina. Brassy coIoured metal is exposed where the undersides of the feet have been filed. The surface of the bowl has been textured with a punch Much of the body of the bowI is missing but none of its rim. The body is of thin metal which is torn around the losses on the bowl 'B / --93 / [EF ligature]' is painted in white on the interior of the bowl. 
Lent by C. D. F,. Fortnum in October 1894. Bequeathed in 1899. B. 1093 in his catalogues. The notebook catalogue leaves a blank after the word 'bought' but it was presumably acquired after 1857 in which year the preliminary catalogue, in which it is not mentioned, was compiled. 
Fortnum regarded this, justly, as the 'wreck of a most elegant model'. He dated it to the early sixteenth century, but it was probably made later. He seems only to have decided that it was for ink when he came to classify his collection for the notebook catalogue, and in his large catalogue he felt the need to observe that it was 'well adapted for a salt cellar', which suggests a lingering doubt. Bowls of this type supported by sphinxes are not uncommon. A silver sugar bowl in the Wallace Collection (XlIL--C202) which is dated 1580, and is decorated with three coats of arms one of which is possibly of the Vitale Rizzi family of Milan, is very close in design. A bronze bowl, 8 cms. high, in which the sphinxes have more wide-spread wings, pairs of lion feet (rather than one), and coiled serpent tails, is in the Louvre (OA. 2793). A vessel with very similar sphinxes to those in the Louvre, but with a 
bowl higher on their backs and of gadrooned form, is in Ravenna (Piccoli bronzi e placchette del Museo Nazionale di Ravenna (Ravenna' 1988), 37). While such bowls  usually described as inkwells some of them are equipped with an upper stage and described as perfume burners (an example, in the Castiglioni Collection, Vienna, is pl. 665 in L. Planiscig, Venezianische Bildhauer der Renaissance (Vienna, Berlin, 1921)). The same sphinxes as those in the Louvre, Ravenna, and Castiglioni bowls were sometimes employed to support the bases of urn-shaped candlesticks of which there are  a pair in the Kress Collection attributed to Roccatagliata (J. Pope Hennessey, Renaissance bronzes from the Samuel H. Kress Collection (London, ]965), no. 486, figs. 571-2, with a useful list of other versions). Sphinxes of a generally similar character but smaller served as supporters for an octagonal inkstand with a conical cover surmounted with a horse which is on 'Mr. Morgan's desk' in the old library in the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York. It is decorated with the arms of notable Venetian families. Such sphinxes can also be firmly connected to Venice by their appearance on two important and dated works still in the city: the bronze support of the reliquary of the Scuola di 'San Teodoro (dated 1567) in the Accademia in Venice and the paschal candelabrum dated 1570 and cast by Andrea di Alessandro Bresciano for S. Spirito in lsola (now in S. Maria della Salute). Sphinxes which  particularly close to those on the Ashmolean's bowl (having one foot rather than two), but larger in size, support bowls which form a unit in Venetian andirons (such as the pair in the Altman bequest to the Metropolitan Museum, New York--14.40--694 and 695), and  sometimes found as independent pieces (for example Wernher Collection, Luton Hoo, no. 472). 

TO HERE

227. Inkstand supported by three helmeted sphinxes and crowned by a warrior 
21 i'ms. (height), 9 3 ciTis. (height of warnor), 9 2 cms (he'Ight of each foot-from paw to helmet) 
Bronze, with a natural dark brown patina and a few trace's of blackened varnish (on bellles of 'feet' cspeciall9 HOHou', lost-wax, cast. Traces of solder below the vess..I. In'scribed '8 / 92 / a' ill white paint in'side the lid and '8-92 e=' along the back of one ftx>[. Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in January 1888 and given later jn rhe same year. No.1092 in his catalogues. Bought in Florence in 1867 for £'4, according tt> his no[ebook catalogue. 
Although he esteemed it for Its completenes'' a.nd condition, r'ortnumwasawarethatthjsinkstandwas'roughlyi'xecuted' he dated lt simply as late sixteenth century The vesscl may berelatedtoaniimbcrofothermodelsmwhichthe'snnilarly 
punched basins  siipported by sphinx-type siipports, for example lot 121 at Sotheby's, I~ondon, 8-9 December 1988. The ornaments on these vessels may be decisively conneeted with those on documented and signed Venetian bronzes 
(above all the great candelabra in S. Maria della Salute and those of s. Stefano, repeated in S. Glovanni Crisostomo, wherc both scroH arms and scroll helmet may be found). The 
?.=::.±c_d.c_ontrappo:tootthewarrii;;===-t-i:.i'si:i:iuc==rs inkstandappearsalsotobederivedfromslowlywinding 
postiires probable in a A4¢„ (or „¢.#c"¢!) of the late sixteenth-century Venetian School. 
.>-;:\ . 
INKSTANI)S ANl) CANDLESTANDS JifeJ
INKSTANDS AND CANDLESTANDS 
228. Inkstand supported by 
juvenile tritons with a cover 
crowned by Pomona 
24.4 cms. (height); 15.6 cms. (height of figure from head to fooI); 9.5 cms. (height of juvenile trjtons) 
Bronze of a slightly grey brown patina with traces of a blackclled varnish. Hollow, lost-wax, cast, with thick walls, the tritons solid, or at least filled up with core, above the chest. (',ast in two pleces (vessel with supporters; cover with Pomona). 'M.187' panted in white inside the cover where there is also an o\'al label printed with a black border and the initials 'E.G.R' above a linc below which is inscribed in black ink '533'. 
Bequeathed by J.I.'. Mallett in January 1947. Reecivi'd in the Museum during the last week in May 1947. No. 187 In the inventor}J of his collection, valued at £60. 'Sotheby 1945. Ernest Raphael Collection', according to Mallett.s notes. 
The inkstand is well executed in some passages, especially the crisp grotesque masks and leaves in low flat relief contra'sted with the punched ground of the cover~punching which appears to be executed in the wax model. But the figure, although clearly derived from an elegant model, had been modified by an insensitive craftsman. From behind (and it is an object designed to be seen in the round) the drapery falls behind the figures right leg without folds in such a manner as to resemble a swollen leg. Mallett described the bronze, cautiously, as north Italian and of the second half of the sixteenth century. It is likely to have been made in Venice or the Veneto. 
There is an inkstand in the Victoria and Albcrt Museum 
(561-1865, in reserve) with very similar tritons who however have hands on their chests and less well-formed tails. There is also a candiestand in the Museo Nazionalc di Palazzo Venezia, Rome (displayed without a number), in which still more similar tritons have their right hand in the same position as those in the Ashmolean but hold their tails in their left. In 
general lobed or gadrooned vessels for pcrfumc burners or inkstands supported by a trio (>f putti or half-animals seem to have been popular in the Veneto in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries-see, among numerous examples, the perfume burner or inkwell from the Castiglioni Collection (L. Plariisciig. Venezianische Bildhatter der Renais5ant:e (Vienna, Berhn, 1921), p[. 665) and the inkstand in the Wallace Collection (S75), the former with sphinxes, the latter with 
putti. The way that the tritons' fins and tails have been cut through to form an irregular web-like foot may be matched in the no less disagreeable way in which sphinx supporters are often terminated. The figure of Pomona is also clearly related to Venetian sculpture. A statuette of a slightly larger size in the Museo Poldi-Pezzoli shows a figure with similar co79f7.¢ppoffo, revcrsed, and without the raised arm but with one hand supported on a slim double-curved cornucopia behind the projecting knee, thin loops of drapery, and a band passing over the breast (Fe I / 68). There is a similar figure in the Musee dc la Renaissance in the Chateau of Ecoucn (CI,. 10931). Thesc in turn may be related to larger sinuously 
po''cd figures t)f highly sophisticated execution p(>ssibl}' designed for andirons, most notably the personification of l'eace, draped, but with a cornucopia of very 'similar character, in the Bayerisches Nationalmusoum, Munich, attributed tt> Alessandfo Vittoria, and the Veniis with a twisted dolphin in 
place of the cornucopia in the Metropolitan Museum, New York, signed 'I.e' and generally dven to Girolano Campana 
(Irwin Untcrmyer Collection, 68.141.19). Figures with those po.ses and siipports may also be seen t>n the skyline of Sansovino's Marciana Librar}J in Veliicc and in miniature on bronze utensils such as the salt in the Victoria and Albcrt Museum (625-1865). 


229. Inkstand with a female satyr bathing an infant 
24.2cms. (height); 14.8 cms (height cjf figiire); 22.8 cms. (length of base); 17 8 cms. (width of base) 
Bronze with a dark brown mtural patina and trai'es of black or blackened variii'sh. Hollow, lost-wex, cast. The figure is i'ast togethe'r with the platform designed to slicte olit of the base (now secured with pins). The pail is cast separatel}r <md soIdered to the tray. Thl're is a decayed lead lining in the pail. '8 / -89 / G' is pamred in white on the side of the r.'ar of the base, on the tray, and on thL' underside of the pail. 
I.cnt by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888 and gi\'eii I:'ter in the same year. No. 1089 in his catalogucs. Bought b}' him in Rome in 1865 from Augu'sto Castellani, '\vith c]ther bron / ji''', for £25 according to the notebook cat{ilogue. 
Fortnum in his n(>rebook caralt>guc toycd with the idea that this inkstand dated from the first quarti'r or half of the seveiiteenth century and was perhaps Roman, siiggestmg, but they striking out, 'in the manner of Bernini'. In his large catalogue he regarded it as probably Florentinc and froin the second halfofthe sixteenth century. 'The influence of Michael Angelo is manifest in the figures and the general design, while the "giglio" at the sides probably refers it to IJ'lorence'. e F. Bell, annotating the large catalogue, evidently agreed and assigned it to the School of Ammanati. Bode considered it a's Vc:not+2[n Of e157'. (The Italian Bronze Statttette of the Rc7?¢¢.ff¢7zec, i (I,ondoii,1908), 78, fig. 94). J. D. Draper in his 1980 revised edition of Bode considers it as 'probably nineteenth century'. 
The inkstand has also recently been attributed by Charles Avcry to Giuseppe dc ljevis, a founder of verona whose name appears (with dates ranging from 1585 to 1600) on modest sized bronzes, both domestic utensils such as bells and mortars, and items of more 'soulptural character (narrative rchefs, statuct[cs, claboratc inkstands, and a portrait bust). De Levis may never have aspired to be an artist, and may never have designed anything more than in(>dest ornameiital works, for whereas the bells and mortars bearing his mme form a coheren[ group, the more ambitious items  less homogeneous in style and some of them certainly repr(>ducc models made by other sculptors. (See the cvidenec admirabl}r 
presented in e Avery, 'Giuseppe dc Levis of vcrona: A Bronze Founder and Sculptor of the Late Sixteenth Centur}'. I. Bells and Mortars', Co#7?o¢.jTc#7 (Nov.1972),179-88, and '2. Figure Style, Co"7¢o;ffc#r (Feb. 1973), 87-97; but Avery 
docs not consider the possibility that de Levis was only a founder.) 
It is certainly true that Giuseppc de Levis's name appears on an inkstand with a narrati\Je character-featuring Christ and the Samaritan woman beside a well, the well being adapted for the ink (Sir ljcon Bagrit's collection, I.ondon, reproduced by Avery, op. cit. 87 and 96), but none of the ornamental features of the Ashmolcan inkwell can be matched on this, or on any other piece a'ssociated with him. The two crudely modclled infants perched on the corrier of the inkstalid do 


resemble maiiy t)n Venetian bron7,cs of the late sixteciith century and Ilo doubt therc was a v(]guc for narrative inkstands [herc in that period. The inkstand would ecrta.inly seem likely to be Italian, and possibly Venetian of the lati sixteenth or early seventeenth century. The Florentine association of the 'giglio' pointed oiit by Fortnum should not be ignored and the grotesque mask incorporated, together wit.h a cardinal's hat, in the cartouche framing the arms is of' a type often foimd in Florentine ornament. On the other hand the vo[utes combined with inverted cornui'opiac would seem to be a motif invciited by Gugliclmo dclla Porn for the tomb of P(>pe Paul Ill Famese-this part of which had been cxecuted bef(trc I 549. The lily, was a Farnesc emblem and 
payments were made in 1551 for a 'S[atua dclla Bacchessa'. belonging to t.he Famesc to be taken t-o [he 'cdsa di fra Gugliclmo Scu]tore (A. Bcrtolotti, A#£.f}z. / o77¢C7¢7'd4. a Ao7#¢, 2 vo1s. (Milan,1881), i.133). Therc is also a conneetioli with I-'ranec which helps to suggest a date. 
As was first pt)inted out by Anthony Radclifi'c in a letter of 13 October 1971 two engravings showing a very similar satyr and child back and front on a naturalistic ground (presumably added by the engraver) wcrc included in the 47?f¢.g#¢r¢.¢c 
fz4Pc / / ecf¢. / G.f po77¢.»#c# / ¢ by Paulus Petavius (Paul Petau) which seems to have been published in 1610, although some of the 
plates are dated 1609. I'etau (1568-1614) was one of the ministers of King Henry IV of France and a keen antiquary aiid numismatist. Thi.' volume was perhaps the first set of illustrations ever made of the contents of a collection. (Sec J. Yvon, 'Petau numismate', Gflzez}g der ¢c¢z4:x:-¢7tr (Sept. 1966), LXVIII, no.108, pp. I 13-30.) This particular item was evidently regarded by Petau as an antique bronze. he may well have acquired it in, or from, Italy. It must have been well known in France for it was reproduced again ---- and more accuratelv-bv Charles Patin (Carolus Patinus) in his lmperatorttm .Rom.anorum: Nunismata ex acre medj,ae et acz.#G.ow¢e / or7"¢e (Paris,1697), opposite p.129. Bcrnard de Montfaucttn also reproduced and briefly discussed the sculpture in the supplement to vol. i of his 4»}¢.¢#G.fe' Gap / ¢.g„ec 
published in 1724 (160, pl. 61), still assuming it to be' antique. It may be that the bronze of this group acquired by the Mus€c du L(>uvrc in 1910 (OA. 6413) is from Petau's collection. It certainly corresponds closely to the engraving in Patin. Th€rc is another version t)f the faun in the Rt)val Scottish Museum, Edinburgh, which was acquired in I,bndon in 1883 (83-47-I). Both seeln to have been known to IJ'ortnum who observed in his hrgc cdtaloguc, '1 do not know another [inkstand] of this model, although I have seen other replicas of the female and her inf'ant without the basement'. The bronze in the I.,ouvre is 14.3 cms. high, and simpler and smootlier than the figure in the inkstaiid, without for instance so many markings in the fur. It is also of a diffcrent alloy, with a high copper content, where the blackened varnish has been worn. The example in Edinburgh is 15.8 cms. high, coarser than the others and with different legs. 
230. Inkstand with a seated draped female figure holding tablet and stylus 
21.2 cms. (height); 16.2 cms. (height of figure) 
Bronze with a pale brown natural patlna, retaining traces of a red lacquer varnish in parts blackened. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. The figure, seat, and tablet  cast as one piece. Inside the upper section '8 / ---- i90 / G' is painted in white and there is a loz,engc-shaped 
paper label with blue border lines and '8 / 1090' inscribed in ink. On the underside of the wooden tray '8 / -90 / G=' is also painted in white. 
Lclit by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888 and given later in the same year. No.1090 in his catalogues. Said in his notebook catalogue to have been 'bought in Paris' for the sum of £12. 
Described by Fortnum as 'probably Flor€ntine' and of the seventeenth cen[ury, but without reasons. He perhaps had in mind the 'exaggcrated scroll work maskLSLthe mask clement of which is only apparent a[ second glance-which siipport each corner of the stand, for they are of a grotesque design (ultimately dependent upon Michelangelo, cf. Nos. 62 and 63) popular in Florence. W. Bode (J£% / ¢.¢79 Bro7¢zc LS£¢Z-%c#c ¢.7G }¢G RG73%G.ff¢7¢cc, (London, 1907-12), ii, CXLIV), describing a related inkwell in the Kaiser Friedrich Museum, Berlin (now Staatliche Museen, Berlin-Dahlem, 1997, re'sowe), interpreted the figure, reasonably, as a personification of Clio, Muse of History. He had previously published this bronze in P¢», 2 (1896), as Venetian from the circle of Jacopo Sansovino (p. 262). He regarded the Ashmolcan version as an inferior replica, but it is of comparable if not superior, quality. The handiing is remarkably similar 
tor instance in the way that the f'ringed hem of the robe is caught up over the figure's left ankle and the sketchy rendcring of its jagged disorder on the ground behind. There are many differences, however. The Berlin figure has a trumpet and carries (rather uncomfortably) a serpent biting its own tall together with the tablet (inscribed 'DEus / INPRINclplo / FTe); al'so, other tablets are placed on the base, one of which she may be imagined as reading. The corner feet of the Berlin stand  simpler scrolls with masks of male fauns sticking their tongues out. Such feet are found in ornamental bronzes made in Venice and Bode suggested the influence of Sansovino. The tight angularity of the pose does in fact recall in a general way the personification of 'Sc# / P£#7G enthroned between the broken pediment of Alessandro Vi[toria's wall tomb in S. Zaccaria, Venice (competed 1603 but designed as carly as 1560)-reproduced L. I'laniscig, Ve79cz¢.¢72¢.i.c47c B¢. / d¢¢#c7' dc;y Re7¢¢¢.jfzz7?cc (Vienna, Berlin,1921), pl. 570, andFraLneesco C,css;i, Alessarrdr(i Vittoria, architetto e stttecatore J'525-J608 (Trent,1961), pl. 54. The fall of the drapery and its fringe on the base  reminiscent of that in the statuette of W¢7¢fGr attributed with good reasons to Vittoria 
(K##f£¢¢.rfo7'¢.fc¢cf A4#fc#7#, Vienna, 5664). There is also a similarity between the figure and a standing statuette of Hapc in the Victoria and Albert Museum (7875-1861) in type of 
garment, style of drapery, and sketchy modelling. For another instance of an inkstand ornamented by a very differently modelled female personification with a tablet see Yvonne Ha'ckehoroch. 13ronz,es, Other Metalworle and Settlpture in the I"}in Untermyer Cjollection (LDndon' 1962). p. xxx 2[nd fig. 69, now reserve collection Metropolitan Museum 
(64.101.14598). J. D. Draper in his 1980 revised cdition of Bode (op. cit.) describes the Berlin inkstand as 'possibly Roman and of the late sixteenth or early seventeenth century'. 


231. Inkstand (aLnd perhaps candlestand) in the form of a putto with two masked horn-shaped containers 
17.2 cms. (height) 
Bron7,e with a chocolat-e to pale tan natural patina. Hollc)w, lost wax, cast, apparently as a single unit. W'ood jammed in the uppei. part of the intenor. On proper left of rhe rock seat '8. / -82 / e' is palnted in white. The detail appears to be almost all in the wax model-that of the hair is especially charActeristic of' a soft material easily tooled. 
Lent by e D. F,. Fortnum in October 1894 aiid bequeatlicd by him in 1899. No.1082 in his catalogues. 'Bought Bol{]gna 1853 for a trifle.' But, acet]rding to his preliminary catalogue of 1857, it was bought there in 1851 (p. 45). Recorded b}' Fortnum as mounted on a black wood stand now un[raced. 
Fortnum described this in his large catalogue as 'a highly artistic and graceful model, the work of a masterly hand and 
probably unique as it is cast "a la circ perduc". The idea is doubtless derived from the antique figure of the yt]ung Hercules stangling the serpents, but greatly modified in expression and action and in the details.' he considered it as 
perhaps Florentine and of the late fifteenth or early sixteenth century. In his notebook catalogue he had 'speculated that one of the horns was for a vessel containing ink and the other for 
a candle or a vessel containing sand. e F. Bell, in pencil additions to Fortnum's catalogue, n(]ted that therc was a similar figure in Berlin biit with serpents (he was perhaps 
thinking of the figure in the Staatliche Musecn, Bcrliii Dahlem, inv. no. 2654), and also that there was an inferior replica of the inkstand but without the horn in the child's right hand in the Carrand Collection (G. Sangiorgi, Co / / GeJ;o7¢ C¢77¢7¢4J a" B¢rgrc / / a (Rome,1894), pl. 46, and no. 216 in the Bargcllo Catalogue of 1898 where it is said to be Venetian of the sixteenth century). The character of the picreed fric7jc of the base composed of masks and scrolls suggest a later date than Fortnum supposed and this is supported by comparison with a curious table utensil in the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore (54.620). This ct>nsist.s t]f [hrec iiudc putti seated on a round pierced base of identical design, each holding a masked ht]rn vessel very similar to those in the Ashmolean inkstand. Balanced on top of their heads are the scrolled legs of a tripod, each terminating in a faun-at.Iantis holding, with both arms raised, the same ball. If, as seems likely, this piei'e was made by the same founder as the Ashmolcan inkstand then the tripod handle would certainly sLiggest a date in the second half of the 'sixteenth century. I have not beeii able to trace the antique Hercules group which F(>rtnum had in mind, bLit the pose and expression of this boy must originally have had some such despcratc pretext. 
Attache.d to the sides of the high altar of the Duomo in Sicna  a pair of bron7,e candlebrackets in the form of child angels emerging from ai'anthus and 'supporting pans upon rheir heads. They re'semble the Ashmt>lcan inkstand, both in 


the modcllii'g of the body, the treatment of the hair, and, most signifii.antly, thi' inotif of the' leafy mdsk (used wherc thi' i'andlebrackets  attached to the altar). The Sicnese angels  likely to date from between 1527 and 1536 when the present high altar was constructed. It has rci-ently been proposed that they might be the work of the great Siciicsc painter Domenico Beecafumi, whose chief activity as a inodcller and bron7.c foimder belongs to the four years 
previous to his death in 1551 when he crcated the eight angels for the columns nearest to the same high altar (A. Bagnoli, 'Id Scultura di Domenico Beecafumi', in I)oovc72¢.co Beec¢ / #ow; 
c 2. / f#t7 fc7„Po' ed. A. Bagnoli cf ¢ / . (catalogue of the exhibition held in vcirious locations in Siena,1990), 531-5). Ill favour of this proposal is Beccafiimi's fondness for leafy masks. They 
adorn the bronze consoles supporting six of' the angels and are also foimd in his paintings+)n the pedestal of the loom in the painting of Pc"c / apG in the Seminar]o Patriarcale, Venii'e, of e1514 and in the pilasters of t.he templc in the fresco of' thi. Marriage of the Virgin in the Oratttrio (>f Sam Bernardint> of e1518 (ibid.107, 610). The twisted pose ofthe Ashmolcan pu[[o is certainly reminiscent of the wriggling children ill Reccafumi's paintings. 
Table utensil. Waltcr's Art Gallery, 
Baltimore, Maryland
232. Inkstand in the form of a triton astride a tortoise carrying a whelk shell 
15.2 cms. (height) 
Bronze, of a high copper content, with warm chestnut natural patina and traces of black or blackened vanish in the hollows. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. The turtle's head with the attached tray were cast separately. No evidence of tooling. Two thin iron chaplets  Vlsible in the interior of the cast, one across the triton's hips and the other across the triton's right 'leg'. There is a small hole beside his right 'leg' towards the tail. '8 / ~83 / eF' is painted in white at back of the tortoise to left of its tail. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 20 March 1888, given later in the same year. No.1083 in his catlogucs. '1 bought it of Augusto Castellani with other bronzes that had belonged [o his father |Fortunato Pio Castellani,1793-1865], in 1865.' The notebook manuscript contains the additional information that it cost i.10. 
The shells would, presumably, have been fitted with ink pots. The tortoises head scrv€s as a handle for a drawer which 
pulls out to reveal a tray for sand. Fortnum observed, justly, of this bronze that it was a 'bold vigorous work cast ; / ¢ cz.re and was a 'bold model suggestive of the manner of Bernini'. In his large manuscript catalogue he described it as 'perhaps Roman' and from the end of the sixteenth century or of the carly seventeenth century. In the earlier notebook catalogue he had struck out sixteenth century and placed the bronze in the seventeenth, no doubt noticing the analogies with Bcrnini's tritons (and cspeciauy his Triton Fountain in Piazza Barbcrini of 1642-3). The rippling vitality of surface and complex plasticity do however seem possible in a sixteenth century work on this scale, although if it were a larger work one might hesitate to date it beforc Bernini. Bode, who 
pubtished the Ashmolean version in his Jf# / ¢.¢# Bro7}zc Sf#f#c#GJ a / £¢c RG"¢¢.£j¢»cc, (I.ondon,1907-12) ii, pl. CLXXI, considered it to be Venetian of about 1575. Fortnum was aware that there were many modern copics- 'more or less varied in detal'. Noting that thesc had been 
made in Rome where his was acquired he supposed that his bronze might have served as the model for them. Five of these copies or fakes  identified below. Augusto Castellani right have made them. What Fortnum, and indeed subsequent scholars, falled to observe is that the Ashmolean bronze is related to a remarkable group of fanciful sketchy inkstands all of which must have come from the same workshop. One other bronze in the group seems [o have consisted of a triton on a tortoise, but it was typically varied, with the shell held aloft by the triton pt>inting in another direction (illustrated in Bode, op. cit., as in Rodolphe Kann Collection, Paris, but present whereabouts unknown). The triton, however, is also included in an inkstand in the Philadelphia Museum of Art (30-I-26), riding a dolphin-like sea monster. The modelling of the chest and face is the same as the triton in the Ashmolean, so is the size, and he holds a very sinilar shell-but at a different angle and with his arms further back. This group can in turn be related to another in 


which the same sea monster is ridden by a putto balaneing the same type of shell iipon the mons[er's head. There are examples (>f this model in the collection of the priiicc of Liechtenstein (no. 262; Bode, op. cit. ii, pl. CLXX, wrongly captioned as in the Benda Collection), in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna (9117), in the Victoria and Albert Museum 
(A. 7-1966), formerly in the Capel Cure Collection (see Sotheby, Jcondon,10 December 1987, no. 35, illustrated), and with S. Franses of 82 Jermyn St., London. There are variations among all of these, in the attitude of the putti especially (who in the Vienna and Liechtenstein versions ride sideways). There is also a related model in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge (M5-1932; Bode, op. cit., iii' pl. CCI,XI, wrongly captioned as in the Victoria and Albert Mu'soum), in which the sea monster carries another sea monster which balances a she[l on its tail. All these bronzes have the same very coppery metal, the same traces of black or blaekened varnish, the same waxy quality, with no cvidence of Cooling (and occasional traces of very fine casting seams). The Ashmolcan bron' / ,e has been examined beside that in the Victoria and Albert Museum: the treatment of the hair of the 
putto and that of the trit(>n was found to be strikingly similar and the whelk shells of six spirals were the same si7,e 
(10.15 cms. in length) and looked as if they came from the same mould (which incidentally may well have been taken from a real shell). 
The riding putti inkstands have of course long been recognized as belonging [o a group (what is new here is the extension of the group to include the Ashmolean, Philadelphia, and Kann bronzes). M. Leithe-Jasper has suggested that the putti might be. the work of Adriacn dc Vries or from his circle and has compared them and their 'dolphins' with those in the Hercules Fountain in Augsburg 
(see G;¢ow4o / og#¢, exhibition catalogue (Vienna,1978), 310- 11, and Renaissance Master Bronzes from the Kunsthistorisches M#fc#7#, VG.c7g»¢ (Washington, I.os Angeles, Chicago, 1986), 229-30). A. Radchiffc has noted the similar figures (tritons as well as putti) and 'dolphins' adorning the fountain (designed by Carlo Maderno and Giovanni Fontana) in the Piazza della Madonna, I.oreto. The casting of thesc by Tarquinio and Pictro Paolo Jacometti had been completed by 1622 (see entry in the catalogue for Sotheby's sale cited above). The inventions may well have been circulating in a diminutive form before they wcrc executed on a large scale at I.oreto. In style there is no close connection with the figures at I.oreto, but still less with any bronzes by de Vries which are always distinguished by chisclling of a kind that is not found here. 
It remains to describe the modern versions which Fortnum suspected wcrc made in Rome (quite possibly uiider the auspices of the Castcllani family who owned Fortnum's version). They differ froin the Ashmolean group in that there is no smaller shell balanced on the tall, the shell above the head is of a different character and points another way, and there is a small infant triton riding in front of the large one. The surface is also diffcrenr, having been cxtensivcly tt>oled after casting with punched and chisclled textures on the sheus. They are heavy casts and of a brassy alloy. One of this type, 
whii'h pa'ssed in 1902 froin the Propcrt Collection lnt(] that of'W Newall, wa'' exhibited at the Royal Academy i.11 the Willter of 1904 and again .lt the Burlington Flne Acts Club in 1912 (nt). 7, pl 32, Hi the-Illustrated cata]oguc of 1913). It had the iiiirials '8 e' and the date 1545 on irt presumably Intended to suggest the authorship of Cellini lt wa's sold a'S lot 40 at Chnstie's, LDndon, 27-9 June 1922, and was then 
placed on loan ln [he Ashmolean Museum in 1951 by a collect(>rmStow-on-tlic-W(>Id.Aliotlierbroii7,cofthisrype collection of R. Weinjnger in Berlin was published by - ,-u r'-uiloiiiu uy L I'lani'%ig in 'Brt>nzi ininori dl Lconc ljeonj', Ded¢ / a, 7 
L. Plani't'io in 'R.,'.i: _:__ 
(1926-7), 554, and another was piiblished, also with an _+ ...., uL,u„ L', LiTulii \ I Du¥-yu), by Y. Hackenbroch (B„jeeef, 
attribution to Lconi (I 509-90), by Y. Hackenbroch / R"M -I, I, . 
°c:,:,e[re,r#he:a('Twr°'rn:'a^:d'Snc:!!tu;;;;;h;i%i'n"i;t'et;;;r (,'o / / cc}Go% (L(>ndon, ]962), p. xxx, pl. 63). The latter bronze was acquired by the Metropolitdn Museum but dcaccessioned ui 1982. There I.' also a version jn the re'erve collection of [heWaltcr'sAItGaller»Baltimore(54.147),onewasacquired by the Getty Miiscum Gee 4 / " with the I,cdcrer Collectlon (85.SB 67-see [he / . P%# / Gcrty M%fe%ee / o2„7¢¢ / , 14 
(1986), 264, no 254), and anofher was lot 171 at Sotheby's, 8Decembcr1989.Thedistrustinspiredbycontactwiththese ca'sts has perhaps infllieneed some scholars in their estimate oftheAshlnolcanbron7.cwhjchJ.D.Draper,forexample, describes as 'probably nineteenth century' in his 1980 revi'sed edition of Bode. 


Inkstand. 
Philadelphia Museum of Art 
Inkstand. 
Victoria and Albert Museum 
233. Inkstand in the form of a mermaid holding a receptacle for an inkwell 
13.5 cms. (height); 7.8 cms. (width); 11.5 cms. (length) 
Bron7,c with a green patina worli in parts to a pale brown natural patina. Hollow, lost-wax, cast, in one piece, pcrforated in the interior of the well. Some i'orc remains in the intcrior of the mermaid where the metal h.is also severely oxidi7,cd (this was treated in 1987 by David Armitage of the Department of' E<ist-cm Art). For earlier tTcatment see below. 'R.-8l / e' is paiiited in white in the interior. 
L€nt by C. D. E. Fortnum on 7 Januar}J 1888 And given hter in the same year. Bought by him in Florence in 1867 f'oi. £5. No.1081 in his catalogues. 
r'ortniim owricd another inkstaiid of an identical pattern which he had bought in Perugia in 1851 (preliminary catalogue, 46, no. 7)-no.1080 in his catalogucs. This he sold in the l880s to Henry J. Pfungst. It was no. 36 in the Dejc7.¢.P£¢.pc Catalogtte of a Small Collection Principally of Xvth and XVJ£¢ Ce#£#ry Bro#2;cf (no date) and was st>ld to the dealers I)urlacher and A. Wertheimer in 1900 and by them to Pierpont Morgan in whose collection it was catalogued by Bode This version is now in the Metropolitan Museum, New York (32.100.191, in reserve). The only difference which li'ortnum noted between the two inkstands was the abLsenec 
INKSTANDs AND c,ANDI,ESTANr>s 
of any arms ini'ised on the shield of no.1080. His first view \vas that t-he iiikstands \vcrc Italiaii and of e1560 (preliminary catalogue), but he came to regard both as probably Venetian t>f the carly sixteenth centiiry, i't>mparing them to the standard sockets of 1500-5 in [he Pia7,7,a di San Marco signed by Alessandro Leopardi (thinking presumably of the sea creatures in the lowest band of f'riczc). Fortnum was also aware of a variant on the in(>dcl in which the mermaid plays a stringed instrument. Among the versions of the two models  the following: Victoria and Albert Museum, Salting Bequest, M. 693-1910, with a stringed instrument-no doubt the version known to Fortnum; Philadelphia Museum of Art,1930-1-32 from the F,dmond Foulc Collection (W. Bode, 87'o722;c Sf¢f#G#Gf, ii (London, 1908), pl. CI,XIX), also with an instrument and with arms in the shield; Wallacc Colleetion (S. 87-I . G. M2\nr\, Wallace Collection C,atalogttes: Settlptttre (London,1931), 35); Collection of Baron and Baroness Schrdder and of Mr and Mrs Lippmann, the former cxhibited Burlingtt]n Fine Arts Club 1928-9, the latter sold to them by Duvcen ]932 (iliformation from Wallacc Collection files); Metropolitan Museum, New York (30.95 . I 11), with an instrument. In addition e F. Bell in a manuscript addition to Fortnum's large MS catalogue noted a version with an instrument in 'Musco Civico Bologna' and another there reproducing the lower part of the model but with the fish tails terminating in mon'ster head'¢ with the infant Hercules on top of them. 
Bode was inclined to give a later date to these inkstands than Fortnum suggested, cataloguing the Morgan and 


another version as School of Jacopo Sansovino. J. D. Draper in his 1980 revision of Bode suggests 'possibly north Italian of the late sixteenth century' . The version in the Victoria and Albert Museum is currently labelled as 'German second half of the sixteenth century'. It is hard to find parallels in larger and better-documented sculpture, but the ornament ar(]und the base is suggestive of the late sixteenth century (compare the compartments of venetian stucco or carved wooden 
ccilingsofthelidsofc¢f5o#G).Anltalianonginissuggested by the provenance of r'ortnum's pieces, and also by the evidence of the arms. Those on the Ashmolcan's piece were identified by Fortnum as of the Malatesta family and he speculated whether the inkstand had belonged to either Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta (d. 1543) or his son Fjrcole 
(d.1598). C F. Bell, however, noted that the arms were those of a Sigismondo Malatesta who died in 1468, the quarfers not being carried by later members of the family. Suspicions aroused by this anachronism were strengthened by the artificial appearance of the green patina and confirmed by the cleaningofthelatter.theinkweHwasremovedfromexhibition in September 1901 It should be pointed out that both false arms and a false patina can be added to a genuine bronze by an unscrupulous dealer and this piece has certainly not been proven a forgery. Moreover it is not certain that the arms are false. A connection with the Malatesta does seem possible. The chesquy bends seem to have been used more by the Bolognese branch of the family than by that of Rimini as Michael Maclagan has pointed out to me. 
The musical instrument held by the mermaid in some versions might also help with assessing the date. David Green and Jeremy Montagu have pointed out to me that this must be some form of cittern 'since it has the characteristic "buckles" at the junetion of neck and body, the appropriate 
shapeofpegbox,anditappearsthattheremightbeaslight "foot" at the end beneath the Mermaid's right forearm' The 
oddityisthescallopedoutlineunusualinacitternbutfound in a Paduan / ;% d¢27¢%G¢ (Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna) of e1590 and in a painting by Bartolommeo Passarotti of 1{¢.#g D¢vjd in Palazzo Spada of 1563-70. It seems likely to be a fanciful Invention of the artist, but if so it is one which is inspired by instruments in fashion all over Europe in the late sixteenth century, especially in Italy where arevivalofinterestinthecittemseemstohavebeguninabout 
1574 when Paolo Virchi's JJ Py;7%o J;¢~ d¢. £¢Go / ¢}~ dj c¢.#¢#7'¢ was published. 
Comparison with the version in the Wallace Collection reveals that the two are identical in si7,e; the interior with residual core and perforations and the colour of metal are alst> verysimilar.TheAshmoleanversionhasslightlymoresharply cutmouldingsaroundthebaseandcartouche,andthefeathers on the helmet appear in the Wallac€ Collection version merely as flaps (this is also true of the version in Philadelphia) The version in the Victoria and Albert Museum differs in having minorvanationsinthelow€rornamentationofthestand,and 
the mermaid there does not wear a helmet. The version with a musical instrument in the Metropolitan Museum has an entirelydifferenttreatmentoftheheadwiththehairstanding uP. 
234. Inkstand in the form of a lion, a tree stump, and a fortress 
14.2cms. (height); 18.6cms. (width) 
Bronze with a chestnut brown iiatural patina, darker in the hollows. Hollow cast in three parts.. the lion's head and the lower front poltionofthefortressbeingseparate,theformerhingedasalid, the latter serving as the front of a drawer. Small regular holes in the bronze (particularly evident in the tree stump but also, for example, below the lion's chin and beside his left rear paw) are from chaplet pins. 
Presented by Mr Henry I. Pfungst FSA in 1908 (A###¢ / RGPorf (1908), 8-9) See also I'rcliminary F,ssay and Nos 201, 203, 233, 427. 
Thestumpofthetreeiscontrivedtoholdpens,theinkvessel would presumably have been in the hon's head and the sand in the castle drawer. e F. Bell recorded the acquisition in the A#7}%¢ / RePo77 as 'probably Venetian in the style of the school of Alessandro Vittoria, early seventeenth century' It could be earlier, and certainly could be later, in date and there seems to us no very strong stylistic or technical grounds for considering it as Venetian. 
235 and 236. Pair of vase 
candlestands each supported by three kneeling putti 
24.6 cms (height) 
Bronze with a tan to dark brown natural patim. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. The vase foot, purti, and base  cast as a separate unlt, the body of the vase is cast as another unit, in both cases. No. 235 is of' 
a richer colour and has numi'ro'Is holes where chaplets have fallen out, beside the masks in the vase and in the legs and chest of the putti. One of the putti in this piece has also lost a portion of the forehead. '8 / -22 / G' and '8 / -23 / e' paintecl in white on the bases. 
L€nt by C. D. E. Fortlium on 20 March 1888 and given later in the same year. Nos.Io22 and 1023 in his catalogucs. Bought f'rom 'Forest London'-for whom see Nos. 264-5. The date is given ill 
the prelimimry catdlogue as 1856 (p. 46). The large catalt>guc mentions eboni7jed wooden stands f'roin whii'h the candlestands have since been detached. 
As Fortnum noted, there is a very similar pair of candlestands, from the Soulages Collection, in the Victoria and Albert Museum (in reserve, 559 and 560-1865). Close examination 
reveals slight diff'crences: [he swags in that pair seem to hang from the boys' hands whereas in the Ashmolean's pair they come from under the base. The vase handles are also more inelegant in the Ashmolean's pair. Another pair, equally close, are in the Museo Nazionale di Palazzo Venezia in Rome 
(displaycd without numbers). The same three supporters  employed in an inkstand, supporting a lobed bowl with a cover crowned by a statuette of Fame (lot 74, Sotheby's, London, 7 July 1988, illustrated). 
The separately cast upper part of the cand[cstands-the vase without its base-is found in (]ther compositions wherc the supporters are sphinxes (see for examples the pair in the National Gallery of Art, Washington-illustrated in J. Pope 
Hennessy, Rena,issance Bronz,es from i:he Samttel H. Kress Co / / ecfG.o72 (London,1965), no. 486, figs. 571, 572-where a hst of other examp[cs is also supplied). Very similar sphinx supports are found in a perfume burner in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool (no. 6236, illustrated in their Fo7.c¢j7z C¢f4l / o27z" (1977) , 471), where the upper register is supported by threc kneeling boys not unlike those in the Ashmolean's candlestand but with one hand on hip and completely nude sce the entry by A. Radchiffe in the catalogue of the Arts Council exhibition of 1975, 47¢d7c¢ P# / / adz.a, 60, no.108. This same type of sphinx, supphicd with a scroll leg and lion 
paw, is a popular motif in inkstands and similar utensils (see
Nos. 226 and 227). Pope-Hennessy observes of-the Washington candlestands that they ' correctly ascribed by Valentiner to the Roccatagliata workshop'. Nothing is known of this workshop, and the few works ccrtamly by Roccatagliata are of superior quality to any of the utensils surveyed here, 
Fortnum's description 'n(>rth Italian, of about 1570~90' seems prudent, although Bell was right in his annotation of the catalogue to point to late sixteenth-century Venice, for the ornamental vocabulary in this group of brt>nzes is, as pointed out in No. 226, certainly Venetian. 
Fortnum also cited the opinion of J. e Robinson that this type of candlestand may be cast from models carved in wood (see Ftoit;mson's C,atalogtte Of the Soulag,ges C,ollection . . . Exhibited to the Pttblic at the Mttsettm of Oriilamental Art, A4l¢7i / froro#g4 Ho#fc (London,1856),112, under no. 347 with refcrenec also to no. 346, the pair of candlestands earlier refcrred to as now in the Victoria and Albert Museum). However, it sh(>uld also be pointed oLit that the very popularity of trios t>f identical supporters reflects the relati\Jcly new ease with which (since the technical innovations associated with Antico) hollow wax modc[s could be cast from the same model, assembled and then used for lost-wax bron7,c casts by the foundries of north-east Italy. From the account of variants given above, it will also be clear that the various components in an item such as this were valued by founders for their versatility. That these three boys wcrc not originally designed for the purpose they  given here is strongly suggested by the meaningless truncated tail of drapery behind each one. 
I owe to Anthony Radcliffe, the observation that candlestands in the Renaissance, being utensils for the writing table, not for the chimney-piece or dining table, do not in 
general exist in pairs. The different colour and the absence of equivalent chaplet holes in No. 236 suggests that it might be a pair made in the nineteenth century. If so, its accuracy must make connoisseurs despair. 


237. Seal with handle in the form 
of a nude terminal putto 
9.05 cms. (height); 2.75 cms. (length of seal); 2.2 cms. (width of seal) 
Bronze with a dark brown natural patina, palest where handled. 
Probably solid cast. Crudely chiselled. The plinth of the term is fixed to a brass seal. The boy's head is flattened as if for fixing to another seal. '8. / 1148 / G' is painted in white on the upper 
surface of the seal behind the boy's feet. Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum on 7 January 1888 and given later in the same year. No.1123 in his catalogues. 'Bought in Florence', according to the noteb'ook catalogue. 
Considered by Fortnum, surely rightly, to be Italian and probably of a late sixteenth- or early seventeenth-century 
date. The seal is engraved with an oval shield of a.rms (barry 
of six) and the initial letters 'A' and 'M' above and below. A 
manuscript correction, perhaps by Bell, interprets the ornate 
'M' as an 'AG'. But the 'A' and 'G' are not above and below 
but to either side in the strapwork of the frame. Although the 
last numeral of Fortnum's number is slightly broken it 
certainly reads '1148'. No less clearly the number in his 
catalogue is 1123. The error may have arisen from the fact 
that he catalogued it next to 1147. he may also have. intended 
to change it to 1148, for he was not sure into which category 
to place his seals-the finest he in fact classified as plaquettes. 
A bronze seal handle in the form of an armless female herm 
is in the Kunstgewerbemuseum, W. Berlin (99.127), labelled 
as 'Venetian, late sixteenth century'. Michael Maclagan points 
out that the blazon on this shield \vas u'sed by two Italian 
families, the Arrighi and Fcranti. 


238. Double seal with a handle in the form of a nude putto standing on one seal and suppordng the other 
6.I cms. (height); 2.7 cms. (length of upper seal); 2.05 cms. (width of upper seal); 2.2 cms. (length of lower seal); I.7 cms. (width t>f lower 'seal) 
Bronze with a dark brown natural patina. Probably solid cast. Crudcl}' chiselled. There are some dents in the surface of the metal-most prominently in the boy's right leg. '81147 ff' is painted in white on top of base (i.e back of lower seal) by boy's heels. From the collection of C. D. E. Fortnum, but it is uneerta]n when given or bequeathed. No. I 147 in his catalogue. Perhaps acquired after the compilation of the large manuscript catalogue in the l880s-not recorded in the notebook catalogues. 


Considered by Ft>rtnum, surely rightly, to be Italian t]f the seventeenth century, but not impossibl}' of the sixteenth century. The scats are incised with a shield of arms bearing an ox passant above which  threc stars of six points (cstoiles) and the initials N. A. on the smaller (lower) seal and G. 8. on the larger (upper) seal. e F. Ben in a manuscript addition to Fortnum's large manuscript catalogue noted that the 'arms would appear to be of the Bossi family of Milan. Gules, an ox passant argent. Some membcrs of the family seem to have borne differences, the threc stars may perhaps be among them, in chief.' Michael Maclagan notes, 'This is all very well and most Bossi families bore an (.)x. But none of them in Renesse or in Sc(]r7,a have stars as well. The initials would support letter 8: but I don't think heraldically oiic can go further than "possibly for Bossi". ' 
239. Handle in the form of a turbanned black boy wearing a quiver, emerging from a foliate base 
9.05 cms. (height of bronze); 1 cm. (height of base); 3.5 cni''. (length and width of base) 
Bronze with a natural pale brown patina and traces of blackened varnish in the hollows. Hollow, probably lost-wax, cast, bronze with some perforations in the thin wall at the figure's back. There  holes of regular size in the turban and leaves apparently drilled 
put of the metal. Bolted to a block of porphyry. '8-75 a.' is painted in white on the quiver. 
Given by C. D. E. For[num on 7 January 1888. No.1075 in his catalogues. No note was made of where or when it was acquired but this was presumably after 1857 for it is not included in his preliminary catalogue compiled in that year. 
Fortnum catalogued this as perhaps a handle ft>r a knife~but itmightalsobeforanotherimplement~andasltalian,dating from the end of the sixteenth century, although it seems possible that it could be later in date. 
240. Handle in the form of a putto, probably from an inkstand's lid 7.6 cms. (height including tang) 
Bronze with a warm chestnut liatural patina and traces of gilding mostly in the hollows. BraLss partially threaded tang inserted in boy's upper right thigh. Hollow, lost-wax, cast. Small aperture behind boy's right knee; a plug apparent in his left breast. Traces of inscription in white paint on thigh near prong originally reading '8.437 e'. [Photographed with improvised support. I 
I.€nt by C. D. E. Fortnum on 7 January 1888 and given later in the same year. 8. 437 in his catalogucs. 'Bought in ltaly' according to notebook catalogue, with no date but pre'suniably after the compilation in 1857 of his preliminary catalogue, in which it is not included. 
Catalogued by Fortnum, surely correctly, as Italian of the end t>f the sixteenth century. he speculated that it might have served as a handle or 'may have surmounted an inkstand'. To this e F. Bell added (in the large manuscript catalogue): 'probably; a fine inkstand with this cover, dated 1566 is in 
the collection of Mr William Newall'. This inkstand was exhibited at the Royal Academy Winter Exhibition of 1904 
(Case 1, n. 3). Figures crowning the cover of an inkstand could however also be employed for other purposes. 
241. Ornamental foot in the form of a satyr 
9cms. (height) 
Bronze with fire-gilding worn t-o reveal a \'Jarm chestnut natural patina, espei'ially on the projecting thigh aiid elbow, the erect penis, and portions of the chest. Hollow, presumably lost-wax, cast. A groove is cut behind the head and below this a wedge of bronze has been inserted into the hollow back ot'the figure to form t\vo wings (with t\ro projections from each, perforated for screws) whereby it could be attached to the corner t)f a small casket or base of an item of miniature furniture. Inscribed '8.418. e' in black ink along figure's back to proper right. 
I,cnt by C. D. E. Formum in October 1894 and beqiieathed in 1899. No. 418 in his catalogues. No pro\Jenance given. Presumably acquired after the compilation, in 1857, ot'his preliminary c€'talogue' in which it is not included. 
The figure might be designed to appear Io support the lid of a ca'sket as well as to serve as the foot t]f one. Fortnum supposed it to be Italian of the fifteenth century, but the second half of the sixteenth seems in(>re likely. He pointed out that the satyr might represent Marsyas awaiting his 
gruesome death, but he does not appear apprehensive or unhappy and the arms  not tethered. 
242. Cylindrical document holder decorated with trophies 
24.8 crns. (length); 6.6 cms. (diameter of the base); 6.5 i'ms. (diameter of the lid) 
'Ciiir bouilli' (leather, soaked, heated, waxed, and shaped (jver a 
mould) over wood. The base is a piece of turned wood coloured black to match the leather. There  loops in the leather on both sides of the cylinder presumably for a suspension strap. The leather has been textured so that the relief ground is granular and the areas in relief are decorated with gold and with a red pigment-the latter less evident than the former. The leather has cracked in several placl,s. 
Provenanec unknown. 
The technique of 'cuir bouilli' was familiar in much of Europe well before 1500 but the style of this picec, with its cartouche and suspended trophies of three types (crossed quivers, crossed shields, and a helmet with wcapt]ns), suggests an origin in Italy in the second half of the sixteenth century. 


243. Salt-cellar in the form of a 
kneeling nude youth supporting a 
clan shell 
27cms. (height); 15 cms. (length); 12.5 cms. (width) 
Bronze, with a rich chocolate natural patina and traces of a blackened 
varnish. There is some verdigris in the hair over t-he shoulders and 
on the underside of the shell, also in the youth's armpit. Hollow, 
lost-wax cast. The shell has been cast with the figure, the base is 
apparently integral but there is some solder smear below the figure's 
right knee and beside his left foot. The cast has been imperfectly 
cleaned around the back of.the figures head. 
Lent in October 1894 by e D. F.. Fortnum and bequeathed by him 
in 1899. No. I 108 in his catalogues. Bought from the Avvocato 
Rusca in Florence in 186l-for fl5 according to the notebook 
catalogue, but his 'memoranda of prices pald' has 'Bronze salt. 
Kneeling figure' by the year 1859 with the price fl6. 
See No. 244.
SALT-CELLARs, GEN.rREplF,cEs, BAsir'Ts 
244. Salt-cellar in the form of a kneeling nude youth supporting a clam shell 
25 cms. (height); 14.5cms. (length); 12.5 cms. (width) 
Bronze, fire-gilt, the gilding much worn to reveal a pale tan natural patina. Hollow, lost-wax cast. The shell and base  eas[ with the figure. Plugs in the bronze  now evident, as  chaplet pins (see for instance both sides of the figure's left ankle). There are firing cracks on the top of the figure's back and on his left forearm. 
Lent by C,. D. E. Fortnum on 20 Mari'h 1888 and given later in the same year. No.1109 in his catalogues. Bought from Augusto Castellani in Rome in 1865 with other bron7,es which had belongeel to his father (see Nos. 232, 245), for £21 (according to notebook catalogue). 
This bron7,c is apparently made from the same pattern as No. 243, although there  differences in the casting, the metal, and the finish-the underside of the shell in this case is also more perfunetory in modelling, but if the same moulds were used for the wax inodels these would have been rough and such a difference does not exclude this possibility. Fortnum believed that his ungilded version was 'the artist's original from which a scrics had been cast and gilded'. he knew also of the pair of figures in the Victoria and Albert Museum-nos. 629-1865 (formerly Soulages Collection) and 104-1910 (Salting Bequest). There are minor differences, in the wrinkling of the shells, aiid the musculature of the back, for instance, but again they are close enough for the wax models to have come from the same moulds. Fortnum also refers to a version sold in London in 1880 for over floo. Among other gilt bron7.e versions of the figures are those in the Museo Correr in Venice (Bronzi dorati no. 37), in the Staatliche Muscen, Berlin-Dahlem (M 39 / 82), in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna (not on display, illustrated in L. Plo:"sciig' Piccoli bronzi it;aliani del Rinascimento 
(Milan, 1930), 37, no. 292, pl. CI,XIX), and in the collection of Dr A. von Frey, Berlin (L. Planiscig, Vc7Gez;¢»¢.fc¢c Bz. / d¢¢#c7. der Rc7z¢G.jf¢#cc (Vienna, Berlin,1921), 543, fig. 594). A number have been sold a[ auction (Christies, London, 3 July 1985), lot no. I 13; Sotheby's, London, 28 November 1968, lot no. 46-without the usual (>val base). e F. Bell also noted versions in the collections of Otto Beit and William Newall, the latter (acquired in 1891 frtrm the Cavendish-Bentinek Collection) was exhibited at the Royal Academy in the winter of 1904 (when illustrated), and sold in 1922 (as lot 80, at Christie's 27-29 June). There is al.so a smaller variant on the same model in the Victoria and Albert Museum (631 -1865, from the Soulages Collection) with the right, rather than the left, arm raised, perhaps devised as a companion for a figure with a beard and moustache (630- 1865). There are variants in which a bearded and balding older man supports a shell of which an example is in the Museo Civico, Brescia; a pair were in the collection of camillo Castiglioni (L. Planiscig, Co / / c2;z.o#c C¢ow¢. / / a C¢Jf¢J / G.o7". (Vienna,1923), no. 50), and one was lot 133 at Christies, 
London, 4 July 1989. In addition there is a poorly modelled 'shell-bearing figure in the Ca d'Oro in Venice in which the boy's left knee does not touch the base, clumsily styli7,ed water is pouring from the 'shell, and the oval base is adorned with vegetation. Finally, a rclated figure of a nude yt>uth nearly standing upright, but still supporting a clam in the same 
position, was in the Cook Collection and in 1952 with the dealer herbcrt Bier. 
Fortnum regarded these figures as Florentine of 1550 and 1560 and 'worthy of and perhaps by Gualiel. or Giaco. Dclla Pt)rta' and anyway 'clearly work of a masterly hand of the School of Michelangelo'. J. e Robinson in his C¢f¢ / og#c a / £¢e So# / ¢gGf Co / / Gef¢.o7¢ ((London, 1856, 124) considered the 
pair there as 'Florentinc work circa 1560', which must be the origin of this idea. However, they have generally since been considered as Venetian+)r at least associated with the ft)llowcrs in Venice of the Florentine Jacopo 'San'sovino. Bode, Italian Bronz,e Stat:uette5 Of the Renaissa,nce (London' 1907- 12), ii, pl. CljxII, illustrating the Ashmolean's No. 243, cla.ssificd it as Venetian of about 1575, and I. D. Draper in his revision of 1980 classified it as probably Venetian of the late sixteenth century. Planiscig (ops. cit.) attributed the bronzes to Girolamo Campagna (I 549-e1625) and the attribution has often been approved (nt>tably by H . Wcihrauch, E#yop&¢.fc47c Byoce2;cj.f¢f#cffG7¢ (Brunswick,1967),158). It is based on Campagna's liking for kneeling supporters such as those angels who suppt>rt the altar of the sacrament in S. Giuliano, or his pair of angels carrying cornucopia candlesticks now on an altar of the church of the Carmini in Venice. 
However, kneeling supporters were popular in Venice 
generally at this date-see the clumsy kneeling putti in No. 235 here, but also, and far more significantly, the paired ignudi supporting the great pair of andirons in the Museum of Fine Art, Budapest, and the similar triad supporting the hardly less splendid andirons in the Metropolian Museum (Kress Collection A.1645 A and 8). The youths in the Metropolitan Museum are sometimes supposed to be by Tiziano Aspetti because of the very similarly posed youth in his documented relief of st Daniel being nailed betwcen boards (commissioned 1592 and completed by 1593), but have also been attribiited to Campagna (see e e Wilson, Renaissance Small Bronac Sculptttre . . . at the National G¢ / / Gay a / '47? (Washington, DC, 1983),13940). The upper 
portions of these latter andirons, including the kneeling supporters, exist in other casts (W. Bode, BG. / ¢tyer&e ¢er Kaiser-Friederick Mu§ettm§, ri.. Bronz,estatttetten. . . (Bcrin aLnd I.cipzig,1930), n(>. 247). The supporters  very close in character and also in size (18 cms. high) to tht>sc supporting the clam shells, the hair is similarly curled, the muscles are similarly emphasi7.ed and of similarly dubious anatomy but impressive elasticity, and the hands pres.sed against the thigh have the same long fingers with squared off ends that we see against the clam shells here-a in(>tif reminiscent of Jact>po Sansovino. 
The possibility of a much later date for these salt-cellars should also be entertained. The supp(]rters recall the pair of atlantes who kneel upon the Iower of the Dogana da Mar in Venice supporting the great gilded globe upon which Fortune 
flics, the work of'the founder Bemardo Falcoiie i'arrviiig out Giuseppe Benoni's prize-winning design of 1677. But the model must siircly have been made by a grca[ artist and 
probably one in the orbit of''Sansovino. 
It is also worth observing that some, perhaps many, of the casts listed in thi's entry  replicas or feke'' made in the last century. The cxamplc in the Staatlii'he Muscen, Berlin~ Dahlem, which is slightly smaller than the Ashmolean's examples, appears to have been distre.ssed and the defects of the cast especially in the shell while making jt look old also make it impossible that it has ever been used. 


245. Salt-cellar in the form of a triton blowing on a conch, 
supporting a scallop shell, and riding a tortoise 
13.8 cms. (height),11.2 cms. (length); 13.2 cms. (width) 
Bronze, fire-gilt, much won to reveal a chocolate brown natural patina. Hollow, furly thick-walled, lost-wax cast, all in one piece with the exception of the shell on the triton's back, which was cast separately, perhaps from nature. Littlc evidence of chasing. '8-110- G' palnted in black on the hollow of the base moulding to proper left at the back. 
Lent by e D. E' Fortlium in october 1894 and bequeathed in 1899. No. i Ilo in his catalogucs. Bought from Augusto Castellani in Rome,1865, for £21 (cf. Nos. 232, 244), according to the notebook catalogue. 
Fortnum considered this as 'a most vigorous and admirable model full of artistic character and the work of a master hand'. He thought it probably Venetian and of about 1550. In his large catalogue therc is a note that there was, in 1893, a replica of this bronze in the collection of Henry Pfungst (for whom see Nos. 201, 203, 233, 234, and 427) but without the shell on the triton's back. Pfungst must have disposed of it before 1900 when he sold his collection to the dealers Durlacher and A. Wcrtheimer (who then sold it to Pierpont MorBan) ar\d it is r\ot ir\ the Descriptive Catalogue Of a Small Collection Principally of Xvth and Xvlth Centttry Bronze5 
privately printed shortly before that transaction. The Pfungst version may be the one now in the Museum fur Kunsthandwcrk, Frankfurt on Main (no. 7436 displayed with an attribution to Alessandro Victoria), which is very close to the Ashmolean version but has no shell and has a higher base 
(but of the same pattern). Another version of the figure, but without either arms or shell, was in Berlin. An ungilded version of this figure, also without the sheu, but in this case with Ilo base, was lot 78 at Sotheby's, I.ondon, 7 July 1988, with a 
companion in a reverse pose~thesc are possibly nineteenth century casts inodelled on the version now in Frankfurt. A similar pair of figures (perhaps the same pair) was illustrati.d by L. Planiscig in his VG7¢cz¢.#7¢¢.fc¢G B¢. / d¢¢#c7' de7' RG#¢¢.Jj.¢7?cc (Vienna, Berlin,1921), 448, figs. 467-8. A variant, which looks like a nineteenth-century cast, in which the tritt)n supports the shell with both hands, exists in several versions sec, for example, Kunstgewerbemuseum, West Berlin, no. 17-18, no. 107 in K. Pech'stein, Bro#2;c" #7?d J} / ¢¢c#p# 
(Berlin, 1968), with an attribution to Girolamo Campagna. Tritons of this sort  not uncommonly employed in 
goldsmith's work, and one, in a pose very similar to that in the Ashmolean's salt-cellar, survives as a support for a nautilus goblet once in the collection of J. Picrpont Morgan (Wadsworth Athenaeum,1917.269) by Gcorg Mond of Dresden (master beforc 1599, died after 1623) dated to about 1620-a group of silver gilt, the turtle resting upon amethyst crystals designed [o simulate foam (no. 20 in the catalogue of the exhibition / . P¢.capo7¢f Morg¢7¢ Co / / Gefo7., held 
at the Wadsworth Athenaeum, Hartford (Conn.), and elsewhere, in 1987). A figure in this pose is also possible in Italian ornamental art at any date in the seventeenth or eighteenth century-the magnificent stand made in Turin in about 1750 and today in the Victoria and Albert Museum 
(W. 34-1946) is a striking example. Fortnum noted that copies of his salt-cellar were made in silver by Augusto Castellani at Rome (from whom he bought his example). Castellani could also have made bronze versions as he may have done in other cases (see No. 232). 


246. Three-sided centrepiece composed of shells, hippocamps, and marine creatures, crowned by Neptune 
37,4 cms (height); 15.6 cms (height of Neptune including his base); 9.9 cms (height of each hippocamp); 20.6 cms (maximllm width of base) 
Bron7.e, fire-gilt, with some parts of silver. The three-sided base is cast in one piece in bronze by the lost-wax method as is evident from its hollowed interior where the metal has a pale brown natural patina. To this base, grotesque canine cherubs of cast silver are soldered (above the curling snouts of the confronted fish). The three gilt bronze hippocamps (each cast from the same mould and finely tooled) are bolted to the base, each in two places (three of the six nuts look original), and so is the central gilt bronze stem which divides into three strapwork branches. Three more or less identical fish, cast in silver, are screwed to the three projecting brackets of the strapwork. Above this  the three scallop-like shells each soldered to a leafy centre, all of thin embossed silver. The crowning gilt bronze figure of Neptune is cast in one piece, with the exception of his right hand (the join at the wrist is easily seen). The trident is separately cast. There are a few minor firing cracks and holes in the bronze. The silver of the minor ornaments is tarnished. The projecting shells retain much of what is probably an original lustrous black varnish. '8 / -107 / G' is palnted in white on the interior of the base. For marks in the silver see below. 
Lent by C. D. E. Fortnum in October 1894 and bequeathed in 1899. 8.1107 in his catalogues. Purchased by him using 'Whitehead' (presumably the dealer) as agent at the sale of the 
collection of Matthew Uzielli at Christie's, I.ondon, on 18 April 1861 (lot 721) for £27. 'It was previously in the Faleke Collection' (a fact not noted by Robinson). 
Fortnum catalogucd this as a salt-cellar or drageoir but J. e Robinson in his C¢f# / o¢#c a / £¢e V¢r¢.o#f Wo7ifej a / A# Forming the Collection of Matthav Uzielli, Esq. Of Hanover lodgrc, Regc"f'f P¢7i4 (I.ondon,1860), no. 678, wisely gave it the more gencral description of a centrepicec, as well. The high esteem in which it was held is revealed by the fact that it was one of the few picees in the Uzielli Collection which were illustrated in this catalogue (pl. XI). Fortnum regarded it as 'perhaps the most elegant in design and as good in execution and condition as any of these larger salt cellars with which I am acquainted'. 
As Fortnum must have realized, there are a pair of comparable gilt bronze and silver centrepieces-generally regarded as salt-ceuars-in the Soulages Collection (Victoria and Albert Museum 624-1865), also involving shells, hippocamps, marine monsters, and scroll-work. They  crowned by statuettes of Jupiter and Venus, of similar size to the Neptune, but with a different base, with similar elegance of pose, somewhat clumsy extremities, and routine accessories. The Soulages pair have gilt bronze rather than silver shell contalncrs, but do incorporate grotesque silver heads like those here, and the hippocamps are similar, although they  smaller and now scrvc to support the base. They have noclementsasprei'isi'intoolingorasspiri[cdineharai-ter as the heads of the hipp.ocamps in the A''hmolcan i'cntrepicce, but they ar.e mor: consistent in quality and are simpler .ind more convincing in construction. 
There are aspects of the Ashmolean centrepicce which make it ceftan that it is not in its onginal form. The hippocamps lookasiftheyw€redesignedtosupportshellswiththeirheads and tails (as in the Soulages vcrsions). More ccrtalnly the 
projecting brackets of strapwork were designed to support something, and yet they cannot be arranged to coincide with the' undersides of the shells. The little silver fish on them now are crudely bolted into place each with an ugly tail stuck in the air-again as if' meant as a support. These  also only roughly cast, as if intended to be only half visible. There are also tiny silver animal heads placed on the strapwork under the shells where they  completely invisible. In addition there is a rough hole in the central portion of the stage of silver shells for which therc is no need. 
Fortnum considered the centrepicec to be Venetian of 1550-70, herc following Robinson who had catalogued it in the Uziclli Collection (op. cit.) as 'probably Venetian circa 1570'. One can see from Fortnum's notebook catalogue that he Inserted '1550-' before '1570' as an afterthought, having at first simply tran'scribed Robinson. This dating seems sensible, although it could certaiiily be later in date than 1570. The' figlirc type is very characteristic of venicc in the late sixteenth century (cf. Nos. 227, 228, 86). Therc are also 
parallels for the grotesque ornament in decorativc work of Venetian origin, and, most significantly, the hippocamps look very like the ancestors of the flat brass crcatures which still serve as ornaments on the sides of gondolas. e F. Bell, however, deleted Fortnum's attribution in the large catalogue and wrote 'Southern Gcrman'. he had chscerned the scarcely legible marks tHi the undcrsides of the threc shells consisting, 
!ie thought, of the initials F. R.' with an object above. These Initials, according to Marc Rosenberg's Go / drc4%G.cde "egr42;c¢.c4e# (Frankfurt on Main,1922-8), belonged to an Augsburg maker, 'but the city's stamp~though not conclusively resembling either-Iooks more like the monk's headofMunichthananyvariantoftheAugsburgpineapple'. Thi'evideneci'snotconclusivc:therearcotherwaysofrcading the smudged marks and in any case the silver shells, as has alread}J been pointed out, may well be additions to the base, stem, and hippocamps of the original centrepiece 
247 and 248. Basin, decorated with battling sea creatures and an allegory of Neptune, with a ewer, decorated with Neptune in triumph with Amphitrite 
50.3-50.5 cms (diameter of the basin); 11.6 cms (diameter of central boss of basin); 46. I cms (height of ewer) 
Silver. The basin (No. 247) is embossed and cha'sed. Some small cast clements are attached-notably, in the central boss, the crown held by the female figure, the coronet above the shield she also supports, 
and the trident of Neptune, and, in the frieze, the club and head of one of the tritons (at 11 o'clock) and the 'spear wielded by the rider (at 2 o'clock). The body of the ewer (No. 248) is composed of 'several cast pieces chased and soldered together. Some small cast element:s are attached-notably the coronet on the shield of arms on the front of the ewer. The handle was cast in three principal parts (monster, acanthus leaves, and child) with lesser parts (club and tail) also cast and added. The date 1619 is chased on the shield held by the triton in the frieze of the basin at 11 o'clock. The revcrsc of the basin is engraved with the coat of arms of the 5th earl of Shrewsbury impaling those of webb (for Barbara Webb daughter of sir John Webb, Bt., whom he married in ]786) and the earl's crest appears funtly in the interior of the foot of the ewer. Some repairs are apparent to the arms of struggling figures at 3 o'clock on the frieze of the basin where the metal is also slightly perforated. 
The plain base to the ewer appears to be an addition probably of the early nineteenth century. 
Placed on loan in the Museum anonymously by ljord de Mauley on 13 July 1971 together with another set of identical design and a larger and more elaborate ba'sin and ewer dated 1621 and 1622. All six pieces were cleaned by Kathlecn Western in September and October 1971 to remove sulphide tarnishing: a thin coat of lacquer was also applied. Minor repalrs~involving stralghtening the feet of the smaller ewers and soldering a loose coronet on the larger cwer wcre carried out in the same period by a local silversmith, Anthony Hawksley. 
AIl the loaned Items were withdrawn from exhibition on 12 July 1973, removed on 26 July, and sold at Christie's, London, on 28 November. This basin and cwer together with its pair formed a single lot purchased by Artemis Ltd. for £44,000. The Reviewing Committee for the Export of works of Art, at its meeting on 27 March 1974, stopped the granting of a licence for three months for one of the pair. By mid-June the Ashmolean had purchased this pair from Artemis for £30,000. (The other pair was bought by the City Museum and Art Gallery, Birmingham; the larger pair was bought by the Victoria and Albcrt Musoum~M.11 and A-1974.) £15,000 was contributed by the Regional Fund of the Victoria and Albert Museum, £5,000 by the National Art-Colleet]ons Fund, £2,000 by the Friends of the Ashmolean, £5,000 came from the France Bequest, £1,750 from the Central Purchase Fund of the Museum, and £1,250 from a special grant by the University Chest. 
All six items belonged to the 5th earl of shaftesbury (1761-1811) by 7 November 1807 when Samuel Rogers saw them, as he reported in a letter of 8 November, 'at Rundalls' (the royal goldsmith, Rundell, Bridge and Rundcll, where they were perhaps being 
repaired). The earl had been in Italy twenty years before, but the reference 'suggests a more recent acquisition-the plate had been bought for £300 by 'Lord S ' at Naples (see Macandrew, cited below). Barbara, the daughter of the carl, mamed in 1814 the Hon William Francis Spencer Ponsonby, third 'son of the 3rd carl of Bessborough, and he was created Baron de Mauley in 1838. Thence theypassedbydescenttotheljorddeMauleywholoanedandsold them. 
Thebasinandewertogetherwiththeircompanions('sec above) were published by Hugh Macandrew in the Bnfr,I::?i.o_n-¥_ag^azine:o:s?ptueiii;Ti;ii'('G.clicsesHver on loan to the Ashmolcan Muscum', 611-20). It was an articlebyMacandrewofthepreviousyear,pubtishingasilver basinmadeaftertheoflsketchbyBernardoStrozzireecntly 
purchased by the Museum ('A Silver Ba'sin Designed by Strozzi',B#% / ¢.cegrfo#"¢g¢2;G.#c,(Jan.1971),4-11),which hadpromptedtheownertorevealthathehadtheseexamples of Genoese silver from the same period. The shields on au thepiecesaredecoratedwitharmswhich,beingwithout tineture, cannot be assigned with ccrtainty, but the cxeecdinglywealthyljomclliniisthemostlikelyfamilyand, Macandrew speculates, the most likely among them to have 
beenthefirstownerisGiacomoljomcllini'flMoro'(d.1653- 5), a prodigal patron of the arts. The pieces must have been made for a Genocsc patron: the larger basin and ewer now ln theVictoriaandAlbenMuseumaredecoratedwiththeBattlc of the Po, a great Genoese victory, peppered with aflusions totheGrimaldi,thegrcatGenoesedynasty,andgiven Genoese marks, while in the boss of the Ashmolcan's basin and its pair the Genoese landmark of the Torre di Faro is conspicuous. 
Although all six pieces of plate have the same provenance the smaller sets of basin and ewer  earlier in date, different in .style, and mythological and allegorical rather than historical inmiagery.TheewcrssecmtobedecoratedwiththeTnunph of Neptune and Amphitrite. Their retinuc of marine creatures appears already to have commenced the battle which is re.presented on the frieze of the basins-hippocamps and tritons  evidently quanelling over the possession of nereids. The child with a club astride the monstrous handles has been identified as the infant Hercules, but might be intended for Cupid with the club of Hercules. The marginal bands of cartouches in the cwcrs are filled with a reclining Mars and a reclining Venus and Cupid, whflc around the basins these compartments are occupied by Danae, 0lympias, Leda, and Semele. A marriage might have been the pretext for this quagery, but hardly cxplalns the central episode on the basin in which a female personification, identified by Macandrew as Victory, is crowned by an angel or genius while she sets a crown upon the head of Neptune (or just possibly removes it from hin), while with her other hand she holds the shield of the family for whom the plate is presuned to have been made. 
The basin based on a sketch by Strozzi mentioned above which is now in the J. Paul Getty Muscun, Malibu (85.DG.8l) thought to be the work of a Dutch or Flemish
r,,.i,,i;,,,T,+,,,,I.,,,;,;hit,,I,;i't,i,:,,:;;;:;####it':.i;::in,,:,I,,:I:::'':,;;.;,:;I,:I,'}ij';'#'#¢:'::1ij'''\!;I}" 


craftsman and the five silver reliefs depicting splendid episodes inthehistoryoftheGenoeseSpinolafanilysignedbyMathias Mclin of Antwerp and dated 1636 (RLksmuseum, Alnsterdan, NM 603nd07) are of similar style but superior 
quality.ArthurGnmwade,whofirstinrecentdecadesrealized the importance of the Ashmolcan basin and cwer, suspeeted that they might be the work of a northern goldsmith. Macandrew considered that the style is 
markedly Flemish in character, especially in the treatment of the figuresonthebasin.Ifinhismind'seyethebeholderreducestheir formstoanoutlineandseesthemintermsofapenandinkdrawing, then he might well imagine the spirit of van Dyck haunting their configurations. During this particular period nothing could be more likelythanforthemtohavebeendesignedeitherbyoneofthelargc colonyofFlemishartist'slivinginGenoa,orbyaFleminglivingin his native Antwerp. 
The rendering of the fine textured hair of the sea horses,)urtaposed with the scales of tritons' tails and the rippling 
sea, the fine low relief of distant mountains and clouds, the varictyofthefruitandvegetablesintheswags,areremarkable, but the expressions of the figures  somewhat ludicrous, the actions are often unconvincingly desperate (see especially the way the ncreid's hair is pulled by the triton on the basin at 
12 o'clock, or the way the neck of the hippocanp is gripped on the ewer), the anatomy of the figures is intermittently clumsy, and their articulation never as consistently dynamic as intended. Either the skin of the chaser surpassed that of the designer of the figures, or the designer ovcrestinated the chascr's ability to follow in the figurative part of his modcllo. 
Knowledge of this silvcrwork was not confined to Genoa. Very similar basins and ewers feature in still lives by Meiffren Conte (e1630-1705)-see M. Fare, Jj¢ N¢f%7'c 7#o7¢e e# lTy¢7?cG, 2 vols. (Geneva,1962), ii, figs. 198,199, 201, 204, 205, 208, and especially pl. VII. A very sinifar silver platter signed 'S.B.' and with the date mark of 1621 was lot 1139 at Sotheby's, Monaco, 6 December 1983. 
249. Parade shield decorated with a frieze of interlaced serpents and a boss in the form of the head of Medusa 
67 cms (height of shield); 52 cms (width of shield); 34 cms (height of oval frame around Medusa head) 
Iron. Sand-cast. There is no obvious evidence of chiselling. The border with the serpent fheze is fixed to the oval body by seven rose-head and eight pyramid-head studs (two studs  missing). There  six smaller rose-head studs on the outside edge of the border (seventeen are missing). There  traces of gilding on the 
serpents, and on the frame of the Medusa head outside the foliate band framing it, and remains of gold damdscening in the arabesque frier,e within this band. 
Transferred from the Bodleian Library e 1930. 
The shic[d was attributed to Lucio I'iccinino and dated to about 1550 by Sir Guy Laking (S#7"ow¢ry G#¢.de (1931, 25). It has more recently been described as a tournament shield and attributed to Antonio Piccinino, the famous late sixteenth-century Milanesc armourer. It is in fact a parade shield and there is no very close parallel with the suit of armour made for Alessandro Farnesc and today in the Old Imperial Armoury, Vienna (nos. Al 132 and 1153), which has been (perhaps over-confidently) identified with that mentioned as made for Alessandro Farnesc by Piccinino (Paolo Morigia, L¢ 7¢o4z. / ¢.£¢ d¢. Adz. / ¢»o (Milan,1595), Book V, cap. XVII). In August 1987 A. V. 8. Norman, then Master of the Royal Armourics, in addition to cxpres'sing scepticism concerning the attribution to Piccinino, pointed out that the shield was unusual in workmanship but 'as far as one can tell from a photograph, perfectly good'. He suggested a date of e1540-50. 
•a i 6 -s> a,',-.{